Nor, in the critics’ view, do the regulations possess any offsetting advantages. They lack that ease of administration that led Justices Holmes and Brandéis to favor use (for ratesetting purposes) of an incumbent’s historic costs despite their economic inaccuracy. See Southwestern Bell Telephone Co., 262 U. S., at 292-296 (dissenting opinion); see also ante, at 481-488. The hypothetical nature of the Commission’s system means that experts must estimate how imaginary firms would rebuild their systems from scratch— whether, for example, they (hypothetically) would receive permission to dig up streets, to maintain unsightly telephone poles, or to share their pole costs with other users, say, cable operators — and they must then estimate what would turn out to be most “efficient” in such (hypothetical) future circumstances. The speculative nature of this enterprise, the critics say, will lead to a battle of experts, each asking a commission to favor what can amount to little more than a guess. See Kahn 333, 334, n. 36, 335 (describing three models introduced in regulatory proceedings, one of which reduced all actual expenses by 27% because railroad regulation had brought similar efficiency gains, another of which assumed that all utilities, including electricity producers, would rebuild entire systems from scratch at the same time, and the third of which assumed New Hampshire’s telecommunications system was administratively most efficient but then reduced its actual administrative expenses by 25%). These administrative difficulties seem far greater than any difficulty likely involved in an effort to determine an actual incumbent’s actual (past or likely future) costs. See Affidavits of W. Baumol, J. Ordover, & R. Willig, Comments of AT&T Corp., CC Docket 96-98: In the Matter of Implementation of Local Competition Provisions in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, ¶ 25 (May 16, 1996), App. 67 (TELRIC’s estimates “do not simply accept the architecture, sizing, technology, or operating decisions” of the incumbents “as bases for calculating” costs). Assumptions are inevitable. And the resulting uncertainties mean a somewhat random sort of rate that can either exacerbate the incentive problems previously mentioned or alleviate those problems by a kind of regulatory coincidence. See ante, at 522 (describing how state commissioners “customarily assig[n] rates based on some predictions from one model and others from its counterpart”).
[For opinion of Justice Stevens concurring in the judgment, see post, p. 110.]
The third category is evidence characterized by the joint opinion as “connecting] soft money to manipulations of the legislative calendar, leading to Congress’ failure to enact, among other things, generic drug legislation, tort reform, and tobacco legislation.” Ante, at 150. But the evidence for this is no stronger than the evidence that there has been actual vote buying or vote switching for soft money. The joint opinion’s citations to the record do not stand for the propositions that they claim. For instance, the McCain declaration does not provide any evidence of any exchange of legislative action for donations of any kind (hard or soft). Neither do the Simpson or Simon declarations, with perhaps one exception effectively addressed by Justice Kennedy’s opinion. See post, at 301-303. In fact, the findings by two of the District Court’s judges confirm that the evidence of any quid pro quo corruption is exceedingly weak, if not nonexistent. See 251 F. Supp. 2d 176, 349-352 (DC 2003) (Henderson, J., concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part); id., at 851-853 (Leon, J.). The evidence cited by the joint opinion is properly described as, “at best, [the Members of Congress’] personal conjecture regarding the impact of soft money donations on the voting practices of their present and former colleagues.” Id., at 852 (Leon, J.).
Chief Justice Burger presciently commented on precisely this point in First Nat. Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U. S. 765, 796-797 (1978) (concurring opinion) (citations omitted):
Austin was based on a faulty assumption. Contrary to Justice Stevens’ proposal that there is “vast difference between lobbying and debating public issues on the one hand, and political campaigns for election to public office on the other,” ibid., there is a general recognition now that discussions of candidates and issues are quite often intertwined in practical terms. See, e. g., Brief for Intervenor-Defendant Sen. John McCain et al. in No. 02-1674 et al., p. 42 (“ ‘[The] legal... wall between issue advocacy and political advocacy ... is built of the same sturdy material, as the emperor’s clothing. Everyone sees it. No one believes it’” (quoting the chair of the Political Action Committee (PAC) of the National Rifle Association (NRA))). To abide by Austin1s repudiation of Bellotti on the ground that Bellotti did not involve express advocacy is to adopt a fiction. Far from providing a rationale for expanding Austin, the evidence in these consolidated cases calls for its reexamination. Just as arguments about immense aggregations of corporate wealth and concerns about protecting shareholders and union members do not justify a ban on issue ads, they cannot sustain a ban on independent expenditures for express ads. In holding otherwise, Austin “forced a substantial amount of political speech underground” and created a species of covert speech incompatible with our free and open society. Nixon v. Shrink Missouri Government PAC, 528 U. S., at 406 (Kennedy, J., dissenting).
As Justice Thomas has demonstrated, the text of the Twenty-first Amendment is a far more reliable guide to its meaning than the unwritten rules that the majority enforces today. I therefore join his persuasive and comprehensive dissenting opinion.
with whom The ChieF Justice, Justice Stevens, and Justice O’Connor join, dissenting.
While South Carolina law also allowed the state alcohol administrator to discriminate against out-of-state liquor when purchasing liquor for sale through the monopoly system, ante, at 478-479, any constitutional defect with those portions of the law would have been at most grounds for allowing Donald to purchase out-of-state liquor through the state monopoly system, as the dissent argued (and as the majority strains to characterize Scott’s actual holding, ante, at 479). See 165 U. S., at 104-106 (Brown, J., dissenting). But Scott rejected that view and held that the broader discrimination effected by the law was grounds for allowing Donald to import liquor directly himself, bypassing the monopoly system entirely. Scott’s holding therefore rested on a conclusion that a ban on direct importation was “discrimination” under the negative Commerce Clause. That conclusion was natural for Justice Shiras, the author of Scott, whose view apparently was that all state monopoly systems, even ones that seem nondiscriminatory to our modern eyes, were unconstitutionally discriminatory. See Vance, supra, at 465, 467 (Shiras, J., dissenting) (citing the nondiscrimination cases Walling v. Michigan, 116 U. S. 446 (1886), and Minnesota v. Barber, 136 U. S. 313 (1890)). The Court’s narrower understanding of “discrimination” is anachronistic.
Young’s Market was no outlier. The next Term, the Court upheld a Minnesota law that prohibited the importation of 50-proof liquor, concluding that “discrimination against imported liquor is permissible.” Mahoney v. Joseph Triner Corp., 304 U. S. 401, 403 (1938). One Term after that, the Court upheld two state laws that prohibited the importation of liquor from States that discriminated against domestic liquor. See Indianapolis Brewing Co. v. Liquor Control Comm’n, 305 U. S. 391, 394 (1939) (noting that the Twenty-first Amendment permitted States to “discriminat[e] between domestic and imported intoxicating liquors”); Joseph S. Finch & Co. v. McKittrick, 305 U. S. 395, 398 (1939). In sum, the Court recognized from the start that “[t]he Twenty-first Amendment sanctions the right of a State to legislate concerning intoxicating liquors brought from without, unfettered by the Commerce Clause.” Ziffrin, Inc. v. Reeves, 308 U. S. 132, 138 (1939); accord, Duckworth v. Arkansas, 314 U. S. 390, 398-399 (1941) (Jackson, J., concurring in result); Carter v. Virginia, 321 U. S. 131, 138-139 (1944) (Black, J., concurring); id., at 139-143 (Frankfurter, J., concurring). The majority gives short shrift to these persuasive contemporaneous constructions of the Twenty-first Amendment, as Justice Stevens properly stresses. Ante, at 495 (dissenting opinion).
In the words of Justice Jackson: “The people of the United States knew that liquor is a lawlessness unto itself. They determined that it should be governed by a specific and particular Constitutional provision. They did not leave it to the courts to devise special distortions of the general rules as to interstate commerce to curb liquor’s ‘tendency to get out of legal bounds.’ It was their unsatisfactory experience with that method that resulted in giving liquor an exclusive place in constitutional law as a commodity whose transportation is governed by a special, constitutional provision.” Duckworth v. Arkansas, 314 U. S. 390, 398-399 (1941) (opinion concurring in result).
According to Justice Black, who participated in the passage of the Twenty-first Amendment in the Senate, § 2 was intended to return “ ‘absolute control’ of liquor traffic to the States, free of all restrictions which the Commerce Clause might before that time have imposed.” Hostetter v. Idlewild Bon Voyage Liquor Corp., 377 U. S. 324, 338 (1964) (dissenting opinion).
Observing that “no competent, substantial evidence . . . established] that Nixon affirmatively and explicitly agreed to counsel’s strategy,” the Florida Supreme Court reversed and remanded for a new trial. Nixon v. State, 857 So. 2d 172, 176 (2003) (Nixon III) (emphasis in original). Three justices disagreed with the majority’s determination that Corin’s concession rendered his representation inadequate. Id., at 183 (Lewis, J., concurring in result); id., at 189 (Wells, J., joined by Shaw, S. J., dissenting).
The Florida Supreme Court’s erroneous equation of Cor-in’s concession strategy to a guilty plea led it to apply the wrong standard in determining whether counsel’s performance ranked as ineffective assistance. The court first presumed deficient performance, then applied the presumption of prejudice that United States v. Cronic, 466 U. S. 648 (1984), reserved for situations in which counsel has entirely failed to function as the client’s advocate. The Florida court therefore did not hold Nixon to the standard prescribed in Strickland v. Washington, 466 U. S. 668 (1984), which would have required Nixon to show that counsel’s concession strategy was unreasonable. As Florida Supreme Court Justice Lewis observed, that court’s majority misunderstood Cronic and failed to attend to the realities of defending against a capital charge. Nixon III, 857 So. 2d, at 180-183 (opinion concurring in result).
Justice Breyer, with whom Justice Stevens and Justice Souter join, and with whom Justice Ginsburg joins as to Part II, dissenting.
I will assume that the ICJ’s interpretation does not bind this Court in this case. Statute of the International Court of Justice, Art. 59, 59 Stat. 1062, T. S. No. 993 (1945) (ICJ decisions have “binding force” only “between the parties and in respect of that particular case”). But as the majority points out, the ICJ’s decisions on this issue nonetheless warrant our “'respectful consideration.’” Ante, at 355. That “respectful consideration” reflects the understanding that uniformity is an important goal of treaty interpretation. See Olympic Airways v. Husain, 540 U. S. 644, 660 (2004) (Scalia, J., dissenting) (“[I]t is reasonable to impute to the parties an intent that their respective courts strive to interpret the treaty consistently”). And the ICJ’s position as an international court specifically charged with the duty to interpret numerous international treaties (including the Convention) provides a natural point of reference for national courts seeking that uniformity. See Counter-Memorial of the United States in Avena, 2004 I. C. J. No. 128, p. 61, n. 128 (Nov. 3, 2003) (even if ICJ decision binds only in particular case, “it is well-settled” that an ICJ decision “may serve as authority beyond a particular case”; citing authorities); Ordonez & Reilly, Effect of the Jurisprudence of the International Court of Justice on National Courts, in International Law Decisions in National Courts 335, 365 (T. Franck & G. Fox eds. 1996) (noting that ICJ cases interpreting treaties “are routinely cited by domestic judges” in many countries “as evidence of international law”).
I do not believe that Breard controls the outcome of these cases. With respect to the third ground for the Court’s decision, Breará concerned a federal, rather than (as in Bustillo’s case) a state, procedural default rule. Those different kinds of rules are treated differently under the Supremacy Clause. See ibid, (applying the rule that “ ‘an Act of Congress ... is on a full parity with a treaty, and .. . when a statute which is subsequent in time is inconsistent with a treaty, the statute to the extent of conflict renders the treaty null’ ”). Contrary to Justice Ginsburg’s view, then, ante, at 363 (opinion concurring in judgment), there is no anomaly in treating state law differently from federal law for these purposes, if Congress chooses to enact legislation binding only the Federal Government in respect to a matter covered by a treaty that binds both the Federal Government and the States. Therefore, reading the Convention to require the state courts to set aside Virginia’s procedural default rule in Bustillo’s case (assuming for argument’s sake that his case meets the criteria I have described, see supra, at 379) would not call into question, let alone overrule, “Breará’s plain holding that the Convention does not trump the [federal] procedural default doctrine,” ante, at 353, n. 4 (opinion of the Court), even if that ruling on its own terms is still good law after Avena and LaGrand.
Perhaps in partial recognition of these points, Justice White refused to abandon his opposition to Buckley’s holding on expenditure limits. See Federal Election Comm’n v. Massachusetts Citizens for Life, Inc., 479 U. S. 238, 271 (1986); Federal Election Comm’n v. National Conservative Political Action Comm., 470 U. S. 480, 507-512 (1985) (dissenting opinion). He believed Buckley deeply wrong on this issue because it confused “the identification of speech with its antecedents.” National Conservative Political Action Comm., 470 U. S., at 508. Over the course of his steadfast campaign, he converted at least one other Buckley participant to this position, see National Conservative Political Action Comm., 470 U. S., at 518-521 (Marshall, J., dissenting), and his reasoning has since persuaded me—the nonparticipating Member of the Buckley Court—as well.
As Justice White recognized, it is quite wrong to equate money and speech. Buckley, 424 U. S., at 263 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). To the contrary:
Justice Souter, with whom Justice Ginsburg joins, and with whom Justice Stevens joins as to Parts II and III, dissenting.
We said in Buckley that “expenditure limitations impose far greater restraints on the freedom of speech and association than do . . . contribution limitations,” 424 U. S., at 44, but the Buckley Court did not categorically foreclose the possibility that some spending limit might comport with the First Amendment. Instead, Buckley held that the constitutionality of an expenditure limitation “turns on whether the governmental interests advanced in its support satisfy the [applicable] exacting scrutiny.” Ibid. In applying that standard in Buckley itself, the Court gave no indication that it had given serious consideration to an aim that Vermont’s statute now pursues: to alleviate the drain on candidates’ and officials’ time caused by the endless fundraising necessary to aggregate many small contributions to meet the opportunities for ever more expensive campaigning. Instead, we dwelt on rejecting the sufficiency of interests in reducing corruption, equalizing the financial resources of candidates, and capping the overall cost of political campaigns, see id., at 55-57. Although Justice White went a step further in dissenting from the Court on expenditures, and made something of the interest in getting officials off the “treadmill” driven by the “obsession with fundraising,” see id., at 265 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part), this lurking issue was not treated as significant on the expenditure question in the per curiam opinion. Whatever the observations made to the Buckley Court about the effect of fundraising on candidates’ time, the Court did not squarely address a time-protection interest as support for the expenditure limits, much less one buttressed by as thorough a record as we have here.
Justice Thomas, with whom Justice Scalia joins, concurring in the judgment.
Contrary to Justice Ginsburg’s suggestion, post, at 554-556 (dissenting opinion), we do not suggest that the deference owed prison authorities makes it impossible for prisoners or others attacking a prison policy like the present one ever to succeed or to survive summary judgment. After all, the constitutional interest here is an important one. Turner requires prison authorities to show more than a formalistic logical connection between a regulation and a penological objective. A prisoner may be able to marshal substantial evidence that, given the importance of the interest, the Policy is not a reasonable one. Cf. 482 U. S., at 97-99 (striking down prison policy prohibiting prisoner marriages). And with or without the assistance that public interest law firms or clinics may provide, it is not inconceivable that a plaintiff’s counsel, through rigorous questioning of officials by means of depositions, could demonstrate genuine issues of fact for trial. Finally, as in Overton, we agree that “the restriction is severe,” and “if faced with evidence that [it were] a de facto permanent ban ... we might reach a different conclusion in a challenge to a particular application of the regulation.” 539 U. S., at 134. That is not, however, the case before us.
Justice Thomas, with whom Justice Scalia joins, concurring in the judgment.
Both the plurality and Justice Stevens’ dissent evaluate the regulations challenged in this case pursuant to the approach set forth in Turner v. Safley, 482 U. S. 78 (1987), which permits prison regulations that “imping[e] on inmates’ constitutional rights” if the regulations are “reasonably related to legitimate penological interests.” Id., at 89. But as I explained in Overton, Turner and its progeny “rest on the unstated (and erroneous) presumption that the Constitution contains an implicit definition of incarceration.” Overton, 539 U. S., at 139 (opinion concurring in judgment). Because the Constitution contains no such definition, “States are free to define and redefine all types of punishment, including imprisonment, to encompass various types of deprivations—provided only that those deprivations are consistent with the Eighth Amendment.” Ibid, (emphasis in original). Respondent has not challenged Pennsylvania’s prison policy as a violation of the Eighth Amendment, and thus the sole inquiry in this case is whether respondent’s sentence deprived him of the rights he now seeks to exercise. Id., at 140.
Justice Stevens, with whom Justice Ginsburg joins, dissenting.
Rehabilitation is undoubtedly a legitimate penological interest. However, the particular theory of rehabilitation at issue in this case presents a special set of concerns for courts considering whether a prison regulation is consistent with the First Amendment. Specifically, petitioner advances a deprivation theory of rehabilitation: Any deprivation of something a prisoner desires gives him an added incentive to improve his behavior. This justification has no limiting principle; if sufficient, it would provide a “rational basis” for any regulation that deprives a prisoner of a constitutional right so long as there is at least a theoretical possibility that the prisoner can regain the right at some future time by modifying his behavior. See Kimberlin v. United States Dept. of Justice, 318 F. 3d 228, 240 (CADC 2003) (Tatel, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) (noting that “regulations that deprive prisoners of their constitutional rights will always be rationally related to the goal of making prison more miserable”). Indeed, the more important the constitutional right at stake (at least from the prisoners’ perspective), the stronger the justification for depriving prisoners of that right. The plurality admits as much: “If the Policy (in the authorities’ view) helps to produce better behavior, then its absence (in the authorities’ view) will help to produce worse behavior . . ..” Ante, at 532.
Not surprisingly, as Justice Thomas recognizes, see ante, at 541-542 (opinion concurring in judgment), this deprivation theory does not map easily onto several of the Turner factors, which are premised on prison officials presenting a secondary effects type rationale in support of a challenged regulation. For instance, under the deprivation theory of rehabilitation, there could never be a “ready alternative” for furthering the government interest, because the government interest is tied directly to depriving the prisoner of the constitutional right at issue.
with whom Justice Stevens joins, dissenting.
I agree with Justice Ginsburg that, in light of recent developments, this Court should simply grant Medellin’s motion for a stay. See ante, at 668 (concurring opinion); see also ante, at 691 (Souter, J., dissenting). But, in the absence of majority support for a stay, I would vacate the Fifth Circuit’s judgment and remand the case rather than simply dismiss the writ as improvidently granted. I join JUSTICE O’Connor’s dissent, for she would do the same. See ante, at 677, 690.
Texas also adverts to another AEDPA provision, 28 U. S. C. § 2254(d), which it says is fatal to Medellin’s treaty claim. The statute provides that a writ of habeas corpus shall not issue on behalf of a person in state custody with respect to any claim “adjudicated on the merits in State court proceedings unless the adjudication of the claim — (1) resulted in a decision that was contrary to, or involved an unreasonable application of, clearly established Federal law, as determined by the Supreme Court of the United States.” Whether Medellin’s claim clears these hurdles is an appropriate consideration for an appellate court contemplating whether to grant a COA, and for this Court reviewing the denial of a COA. See Miller-El, 537 U. S., at 349-350 (Scalia, J., concurring) (“A circuit justice or judge must deny a COA ... if all reasonable jurists would conclude that a substantive provision of the federal habeas statute bars relief”); see also id., at 336 (majority opinion).
Justice Ginsburg gives an unduly narrow construction to the second question presented. It asks: “[S]hould a court in the United States give effect to the judgments in Avena and LaGrand”? Brief for Petitioner i. This question cannot be read to ask for “ ‘effect’ ” to be given in the strict sense of the law of judgments, ante, at 670-671 (Ginsburg, J., concurring): Because Medellin was not a beneficiary of the judgment in LaGrand Case (F. R. G. v. U. S.), 2001 I. C. J. 466 (Judgment of June 27), a case between Germany and the United States, the judgment in LaGrand cannot be enforced as to Medellin. What he asks is that American courts reach the same interpretation of the Vienna Convention as did the body charged with adjudicating international disputes arising out of the Convention — in part for the sake of “uniform treaty interpretation.” Brief for Petitioner i. This understanding of the second question takes account, as it should, of the fact that the correct, independent interpretation of the Vienna Convention was the central question in the habeas proceedings below. Moreover, it is consistent with the practical way we decide what is “fairly included” in a question presented. See this Court’s Rule 14.1(a); City of Sherrill v. Oneida Indian Nation of N. Y., ante, at 213, n. 6; Ballard v. Commissioner, ante, at 47, n. 2.
with whom Justice Stevens and Justice Kennedy join, dissenting.
Justice Thomas is thus wrong in stating that our approach might suggest “a policy-driven preference for government monopoly over privatization.” Post, at 354 (opinion concurring in judgment). That is instead the preference of the affected locality here. Our opinion simply recognizes that a law favoring a public entity and treating all private entities the same does not discriminate against interstate commerce as does a law favoring local business over all others.
The practical significance of the Act’s participatory rights and procedural protections may be seriously diminished if parents are unable to obtain reimbursement for the costs of their experts. In IDEA cases, experts are necessary. See Kuriloff & Goldberg, Is Mediation a Fair Way to Resolve Special Education Disputes? First Empirical Findings, 2 Harv. Negotiation L. Rev. 35, 40 (1997) (detailing findings of study showing high correlation between use of experts and success of parents in challenging school district’s plan); Kuriloff, Is Justice Served by Due Process?: Affecting the Outcome of Special Education Hearings in Pennsylvania, 48 Law & Contemp. Prob. 89, 100-101, 109 (1985) (same); see also Brief for National Disability Rights Network et al. as Amici Curiae 6-15 (collecting sources); cf. Schaffer, supra, at 66-67 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting) (“[T]he vast majority of parents whose children require the benefits and protections provided in the IDEA lack knowledge about the educational resources available to their child and the sophistication to mount an effective case against a district-proposed” individualized education program (IEP) (internal quotation marks and brackets omitted)).
That subsection (e)(1) strips jurisdiction while subsections (e)(2) and (e)(3) restore it in limited form is hardly a distinction upon which a negative inference must founder. Justice Scalia, in arguing to the contrary, maintains that Congress had “ample reason” to provide explicitly for application of subsections (e)(2) and (e)(3) to pending cases because “jurisdiction-ousting” provisions like subsection (e)(1) have been treated differently under our retroactivity jurisprudence than “jurisdiction-creating” ones like subsections (e)(2) and (e)(3). Post, at 662 (dissenting opinion); see also Reply Brief in Support of Respondents’ Motion to Dismiss 5-6. That theory is insupportable. Assuming, arguendo, that subsections (e)(2) and (e)(3) “confer new jurisdiction (in the D. C. Circuit) where there was none before,” post, at 662 (emphasis in original); but see Rasul v. Bush, 542 U. S. 466 (2004), and that our precedents can be read to “strongly indicat[e]” that jurisdiction-creating statutes raise special retro-activity concerns not also raised by jurisdiction-stripping statutes, post, at 662, subsections (e)(2) and (e)(3) “confer” jurisdiction in a manner that cannot conceivably give rise to retroactivity questions under our precedents. The provisions impose no additional liability or obligation on any private party or even on the United States, unless one counts the burden of litigating an appeal—a burden not a single one of our cases suggests triggers retroactivity concerns. Moreover, it strains credulity to suggest that the desire to reinforce the application of subsections (e)(2) and (e)(3) to pending cases drove Congress to exclude subsection (e)(1) from § 1005(h)(2).
Common Article 3, then, is applicable here and, as indicated above, requires that Hamdan be tried by a “regularly constituted court affording all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as indispensable by civilized peoples.” 6 U. S. T., at 3320 (Art. 3, ¶ 1(d)). While the term “regularly constituted court” is not specifically defined in either Common Article 3 or its accompanying commentary, other sources disclose its core meaning. The commentary accompanying a provision of the Fourth Geneva Convention, for example, defines “‘regularly constituted’” tribunals to include “ordinary military courts” and “definitely exclud[e] all special tribunals.” GCIV Commentary 340 (defining the term “properly constituted” in Article 66, which the commentary treats as identical to “regularly constituted”); see also Yamashita, 327 U. S., at 44 (Rutledge, J., dissenting) (describing military commission as a court “specially constituted for the particular trial”). And one of the Red Cross’ own treatises defines “regularly constituted court” as used in Common Article 3 to mean “established and organised in accordance with the laws and procedures already in force in a country.” Int’l Comm, of Red Cross, 1 Customary Int’l Humanitarian Law 355 (2005); see also GCIV Commentary 340 (observing that “ordinary military courts” will “be set up in accordance with the recognized principles governing the administration of justice”).
The Government offers only a cursory defense of Hamdan’s military commission in light of Common Article 3. See Brief for Respondents 49-50. As Justice Kennedy explains, that defense fails because “[t]he regular military courts in our system are the courts-martial established by congressional statutes.” Post, at 644 (opinion concurring in part). At a minimum, a military commission “can be ‘regularly constituted’ by the standards of our military justice system only if some practical need explains deviations from court-martial practice.” Post, at 645. As we have explained, see Part VI-C, supra, no such need has been demonstrated here.
We agree with Justice Kennedy that the procedures adopted to try Hamdan deviate from those governing courts-martial in ways not justified by any “evident practical need,” post, at 647, and for that reason, at least, fail to afford the requisite guarantees. See post, at 646-653. We add only that, as noted in Part VI-A, supra, various provisions of Commission Order No. 1 dispense with the principles, articulated in Article 75 and indisputably part of the customary international law, that an accused must, absent disruptive conduct or consent, be present for his trial and must be privy to the evidence against him. See §§ 6(B)(3), (D). That the Government has a compelling interest in denying Hamdan access to certain sensitive information is not doubted. Cf. post, at 723-724 (Thomas, J., dissenting). But, at least absent express statutory provision to the contrary, information used to convict a person of a crime must be disclosed to him.
Justice Breyer, with whom Justice Kennedy, Justice Souter, and Justice Ginsburg join, concurring.
Justice Kennedy, with whom Justice Souter, Justice Ginsburg, and Justice Breyer join as to Parts I and II, concurring in part.
Finally, for the same reason, I express no view on the merits of other limitations on military commissions described as elements of the common law of war in Part V of Justice Stevens’ opinion. See ante, at 595-600, 611-613; post, at 683-689 (Thomas, J., dissenting).
Justice Scalia, with whom Justice Thomas and Justice Alito join, dissenting.
Justice Thomas, with whom Justice Scalia joins, and with whom Justice Alito joins in all but Parts I, II-C-1, and III-B-2, dissenting.
After seeing the plurality overturn longstanding precedents in order to seize jurisdiction over this case, ante, at 656-658 (Scalia, J., dissenting), and after seeing them disregard the clear prudential counsel that they abstain in these circumstances from using equitable powers, ante, at 672-678, it is no surprise to see them go on to overrule one after another of the President’s judgments pertaining to the conduct of an ongoing war. Those Justices who today disregard the Commander in Chief’s wartime decisions, only 10 days ago deferred to the judgment of the Corps of Engineers with regard to a matter much more within the competence of lawyers, upholding that agency’s wildly implausible conclusion that a storm drain is a tributary of the waters of the United States. See Rapanos v. United States, 547 U. S. 715 (2006). It goes without saying that there is much more at stake here than storm drains. The plurality’s willingness to second-guess the determination of the political branches that these conspirators must be brought to justice is both unprecedented and dangerous.
Justice Alito, with whom Justice Scalia and Justice Thomas join in Parts I—III, dissenting.
In contrast to this interpretation, the opinions supporting the judgment today hold that the military commission before which petitioner would be tried is not “a regularly constituted court” (1) because “no evident practical need explains” why its “structure and composition ... deviate from conventional court-martial standards,” ante, at 647 (Kennedy, J., concurring in part); see also ante, at 632-633 (opinion of the Court); and (2) because, contrary to 10 U. S. C. § 836(b), the procedures specified for use in the proceeding before the military commission impermissibly differ from those provided under the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) for use by courts-martial, ante, at 615-625 (opinion of the Court); ante, at 651-653 (Kennedy, J., concurring in part). I do not believe that either of these grounds is sound.
In his insistence to the contrary, Justice Scalia reads too much into Bruner v. United States, 343 U. S. 112 (1952), Hallowell v. Commons, 239 U. S. 506 (1916), and Insurance Co. v. Ritchie, 5 Wall. 541 (1867). See post, at 656-658 (dissenting opinion). None of those cases says that the absence of an express provision reserving jurisdiction over pending cases trumps or renders irrelevant any other indications of congressional intent. Indeed, Bruner itself relied on such other indications—including a negative inference drawn from the statutory text, cf. infra, at 578—to support its conclusion that jurisdiction was not available. The Court observed that (1) Congress had been put on notice by prior lower court cases addressing the Tucker Act that it ought to specifically reserve jurisdiction over pending cases, see 343 U. S., at 115, and (2) in contrast to the congressional silence concerning reservation of jurisdiction, reservation had been made of “ ‘any rights or liabilities’ existing at the effective date of the Act” repealed by another provision of the Act, ibid., n. 7.
While statements attributed to the final bill’s two other sponsors, Senators Graham and Kyi, arguably contradict Senator Levin’s contention that the final version of the DTA preserved jurisdiction over pending habeas eases, see 151 Cong. Rec. S14263-S14264 (Dec. 21,2005), those statements appear to have been inserted into the Congressional Record after the Senate debate. See Reply Brief for Petitioner 5, n. 6; see also 151 Cong. Rec. S14260 (statement of Sen. Kyi) (“I would like to say a few words about the now-completed National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 2006” (emphasis added)). All statements made during the debate itself support Senator Levin’s understanding that the final text of the DTA would not render subsection (e)(1) applicable to pending cases. See, e.g., id., at S14245, S14252-S14253, S14274-S14275 (Dec. 21, 2005). The statements that Justice Scalia cites as evidence to the contrary construe subsection (e)(8) to strip this Court of jurisdiction, see post, at 666, n. 4 (dissenting opinion) (quoting 151 Cong. Rec. S12796 (Nov. 15, 2005) (statement of Sen. Specter))—a construction that the Government has expressly disavowed in this litigation, see n. 11, infra. The inapposite November 14, 2005, statement of Senator Graham, which Justice Scalia cites as evidence of that Senator’s “assumption that pending cases are covered,” post, at 666, and n. 3 (citing 151 Cong. Rec. S12756 (Nov. 14, 2005)), follows directly after the uncontradicted statement of his cosponsor, Senator Levin, assuring members of the Senate that “the amendment will not strip the courts of jurisdiction over [pending] eases,” id., at S12755.
This assertion is itself highly questionable. The cases that Justice Scalia cites to support his distinction are Republic of Austria v. Altmann, 541 U. S. 677 (2004), and Hughes Aircraft Co. v. United States ex rel. Schumer, 520 U. S. 939 (1997). See post, at 662. While the Court in both of those eases recognized that statutes “creating” jurisdiction may have retroactive effect if they affect “substantive” rights, see Altmann, 541 U. S., at 695, and n. 15; Hughes Aircraft, 520 U. S., at 951, we have applied the same analysis to statutes that have jurisdiction-stripping effect, see Lindh v. Murphy, 521 U. S. 320, 327-328 (1997); id., at 342-343 (Rehnquist, C. J., dissenting) (construing AEDPA’s amendments as “ousting jurisdiction”).
On this point, it is noteworthy that the Court in Ex parte Quirin, 317 U. S. 1 (1942), looked beyond Congress’ declaration of war and accompanying authorization for use of force during World War II, and relied instead on Article of War 15 to find that Congress had authorized the use of military commissions in some circumstances. See id., at 26-29. Justice Thomas’ assertion that we commit “error” in reading Article 21 of the UCMJ to place limitations upon the President’s use of military commissions, see post, at 682 (dissenting opinion), ignores the reasoning in Quirin.
Justice Thomas would treat Usama bin Laden’s 1996 declaration of jihad against Americans as the inception of the war. See post, at 683-688 (dissenting opinion). But even the Government does not go so far; although the United States had for some time prior to the attacks of September 11, 2001, been aggressively pursuing al Qaeda, neither in the charging document nor in submissions before this Court has the Government asserted that the President’s war powers were activated prior to September 11, 2001. Cf. Brief for Respondents 25 (describing the events of September 11,2001, as “an act of war” that “triggered a right to deploy military forces abroad to defend the United States by combating al Qaeda”). Justice Thomas’ further argument that the AUMF is “backward looking” and therefore authorizes trial by military commission of crimes that occurred prior to the inception of war is insupportable. See post, at 685, n. 3. If nothing else, Article 21 of the UCMJ requires that the President comply with the law of war in his use of military commissions. As explained in the text, the law of war permits trial only of offenses “committed within the period of the war.” Winthrop 837; see also Quirin, 317 U. S., at 28-29 (observing that law-of-war military commissions may be used to try “those enemies who in their attempt to thwart or impede our military effort have violated the law of war” (emphasis added)). The sources that Justice Thomas relies on to suggest otherwise simply do not support his position. Colonel Green’s short exegesis on military commissions cites Howland for the proposition that “[ojffenses committed before a formal declaration of war or before the declaration of martial law may be tried by military commission.” The Military Commission, 42 Am. J. Int’l L. 832, 848 (1948) (emphasis added) (cited post, at 686). Assuming that to be true, nothing in our analysis turns on the admitted absence of either a formal declaration of war or a declaration of martial law. Our focus instead is on the September 11, 2001, attacks that the Government characterizes as the relevant “aet[s] of war,” and on the measure that authorized the President’s deployment of military force— the AUMF. Because we do not question the Government’s position that the war commenced with the events of September 11, 2001, the Prize Cases, 2 Black 635 (1863) (cited post, at 679, 684, 685, and 687 (Thomas, J., dissenting)), are not germane to the analysis.
We may assume that such a determination would be entitled to a measure of deference. For the reasons given by Justice Kennedy, see post, at 640 (opinion concurring in part), however, the level of deference accorded to a determination made under subsection (b) presumably would not be as high as that accorded to a determination under subsection (a).
Justice Thomas looks not to the President’s official Article 36(a) determination, but instead to press statements made by the Secretary of Defense and the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy. See post, at 712-713 (dissenting opinion). We have not heretofore, in evaluating the legality of executive action, deferred to comments made by such officials to the media. Moreover, the only additional reason the comments provide—aside from the general danger posed by international terrorism— for departures from court-martial procedures is the need to protect classified information. As we explain in the text, and as Justice Kennedy elaborates in his separate opinion, the structural and procedural defects of Hamdan’s commission extend far beyond rules preventing access to classified information.
The Government offers no defense of these procedures other than to observe that the defendant may not be barred from access to evidence if such action would deprive him of a “full and fair trial.” Commission Order No. 1, § 6(D)(5)(b). But the Government suggests no circumstances in which it would be “fair” to convict the accused based on evidence he has not seen or heard. Cf. Crawford v. Washington, 541 U. S. 36, 49 (2004) (“ ‘It is a rule of the common law, founded on natural justice, that no man shall be prejudiced by evidence which he had not the liberty to cross examine’ ” (quoting State v. Webb, 2 N. C. 103, 104 (Super. L. & Eq. 1794) (per curiam)); Diaz v. United States, 223 U. S. 442, 455 (1912) (describing the right to be present as “scarcely less important to the accused than the right of trial itself”); Lewis v. United States, 146 U. S. 370, 372 (1892) (exclusion of defendant from part of proceedings is “contrary to the dictates of humanity” (internal quotation marks omitted)); Joint Anti-Fascist Refugee Comm. v. McGrath, 341 U. S. 123, 170, n. 17, 171 (1951) (Frankfurter, J., concurring) (“The plea that evidence of guilt must be secret is abhorrent to free men” (internal quotation marks omitted)). More fundamentally, the legality of a tribunal under Common Article 3 cannot be established by bare assurances that, whatever the character of the court or the procedures it follows, individual adjudicators will act fairly.
Appellants do not raise a district-specific political gerrymandering claim against District 24. Even if the claim were cognizable as part of appellants’ statewide challenge, it would be unpersuasive. Just as for the statewide claim, appellants would lack any reliable measure of partisan fairness. Justice Stevens suggests the burden on representational rights can be measured by comparing the success of Democrats in old District 24 with their success in the new districts they now occupy. Post, at 475-476 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). There is no reason, however, why the old district has any special claim to fairness. In fact, old District 24, no less than the old redistricting plan as a whole, was formed for partisan reasons. See Session, 298 F. Supp. 2d, at 484; see also Balderas, App. E to Juris. Statement 208a. Furthermore, Justice Stevens’ conclusion that the State has not complied with § 5 of the Voting Rights Act, post, at 478-481—effectively overruling the Attorney General without briefing, argument, or a lower court opinion on the issue—does not solve the problem of determining a reliable measure of impermissible partisan effect.
Justice Stevens, with whom Justice Breyer joins as to Parts I and II, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
Unlike Vieth, the narrow question presented by the statewide challenge in this litigation is whether the State’s decision to draw the map in the first place, when it was under no legal obligation to do so, was permissible. It is undeniable that identifying the motive for making that basic decision is a readily manageable judicial task. See Gomillion v. Lightfoot, 364 U. S. 339, 341 (1960) (noting that plaintiffs’ allegations, if true, would establish by circumstantial evidence “tantamount for all practical purposes to a mathematical demonstration,” that redistricting legislation had been enacted “solely” to segregate voters along racial lines); cf. Personnel Administrator of Mass. v. Feeney, 442 U. S. 256, 276-280 (1979) (analyzing whether the purpose of a law was to discriminate against women). Indeed, although the Constitution places no per se ban on midcycle redistricting, a legislature’s decision to redistrict in the middle of the census cycle, when the legislature is under no legal obligation to do so, makes the judicial task of identifying the legislature’s motive simpler than it would otherwise be. As Justice Breyer has pointed out, “the presence of midcycle redistricting, for any reason, raises a fair inference that partisan machinations played a major role in the map-drawing process.” Vieth, 541 U. S., at 367 (dissenting opinion).
argues that adopting “the modified sole-intent test” could “encourage partisan excess at the outset of the decade, when a legislature redistricts pursuant to its decennial constitutional duty and is then immune from the charge of sole motivation.” Ante, at 419, 420. But this would be a problem of the Court’s own making. As the decision in Cox v. Larios, 542 U. S. 947, demonstrates, there are, in fact, readily manageable judicial standards that would allow injured parties to challenge excessive (and unconstitutional) partisan gerrymandering undertaken in response to the release of the decennial census data. See also Vieth, 541 U. S., at 328-339 (Stevens, J., dissenting); id., at 347-353 (Souter, J., joined by Ginsburg, J., dissenting); id., at 365-367 (Breyer, J., dissenting). Justice Kennedy’s concern about a heightened incentive to engage in such excessive partisan gerrymandering would be avoided if the Court were willing to enforce those standards.
I recognize that legislatures will always be aware of politics and that we must tolerate some consideration of political goals in the redistricting process. See Cousins v. City Council of Chicago, 466 F. 2d 830, 847 (CA7 1972) (Stevens, J., dissenting). However, I think it is equally clear that, when a plaintiff can prove that a legislature’s predominant motive in drawing a particular district was to disadvantage a politically salient group, and that the decision has the intended effect, the plaintiff’s constitutional rights have been violated. See id., at 859-860. Indeed, in Vieth, five Members of this Court explicitly recognized that extreme partisan gerrymandering violates the Constitution. See 541 U. S., at 307, 312-316 (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment); id., at 317-318 (Stevens, J., dissenting); id., at 343, 347-352 (Souter, J., joined by Ginsburg, J., dissenting); id., at 356-357, 366-367 (Breyer, J., dissenting). The other four Justices in Vieth stated that they did not disagree with that conclusion. See id., at 292 (plurality opinion). The Vieth plurality nonetheless determined that there were no judicially manageable standards to assess partisan gerrymandering claims. Id., at 305-306. However, the following test, which shares some features of the burden-shifting standard for assessing unconstitutional partisan gerrymandering proposed by Justice Souter’s opinion in Vieth, see id., at 348-351, would provide a remedy for at least the most blatant unconstitutional partisan gerrymanders and would also be eminently manageable.
Justice Souter, with whom Justice Ginsburg joins, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
I join Part II-D of the principal opinion, rejecting the one-person, one-vote challenge to Plan 1374C based simply on its mid-decade timing, and I also join Part II-A, in which the Court preserves the principle that partisan gerrymandering can be recognized as a violation of equal protection, see Vieth v. Jubelirer, 541 U. S. 267, 306 (2004) (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment); id., at 317 (Stevens, J., dissenting); id., at 346 (Souter, J., dissenting); id., at 355 (Breyer, J., dissenting). I see nothing to be gained by working through these cases on the standard I would have applied in Vieth, supra, at 346-355 (dissenting opinion), because here as in Vieth we have no majority for any single criterion of impermissible gerrymander (and none for a conclusion that Plan 1374C is unconstitutional across the board). I therefore treat the broad issue of gerrymander much as the subject of an improvident grant of certiorari, and add only two thoughts for the future: that I do not share Justice Kennedy’s seemingly flat rejection of any test of gerrymander turning on the process followed in redistricting, see ante, at 416-420 (principal opinion), nor do I rule out the utility of a criterion of symmetry as a test, see, e. g., King & Browning, Democratic Representation and Partisan Bias in Congressional Elections, 81 Am. Pol. Sei. Rev. 1251 (1987). Interest in exploring this notion is evident, see ante, at 419-420 (principal opinion); ante, at 465-468 (Stevens, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part); post, at 491-492 (Breyer, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). Perhaps further attention could be devoted to the administrability of such a criterion at all levels of redistricting and its review.
See Larios v. Cox, 300 F. Supp. 2d 1320, 1342-1353 (ND Ga. 2004) (per curiam). In Cox, the three-judge District Court undertook a searching review of the entire record in concluding that the population deviations in the state legislative districts created for the Georgia House and Senate after the release of the 2000 census data were not driven by any traditional redistricting criteria, such as compactness or preserving county lines, but were instead driven by the impermissible factors of regional favoritism and the discriminatory protection of Democratic incumbents. If there were no judicially manageable standards to assess whether a State’s adoption of a redistricting map was based on valid governmental objectives, we would not have summarily affirmed the decision in Cox over the dissent of only one Justice. See 542 U. S. 947; id., at 951 (Scalia, J., dissenting). In addition, as Part III of the Court’s opinion and this Part of my opinion demonstrate, assessing whether a redistricting map has a discriminatory impact on the opportunities for voters and candidates of a particular party to influence the political process is a manageable judicial task.
Justice Breyer has authorized me to state that he agrees with Justice Scalia that compliance with § 5 of the Voting Rights Act is also a compelling state interest. See post, at 518 (opinion concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part). I, too, agree with Justice Scalia on this point.
As Justice Kennedy explains, see ante, at 443-447, plaintiffs did, however, challenge District 24 under § 2. Iam in substantial agreement with Justice Souter’s discussion of this issue. See post, at 485-490 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). Specifically, I agree with Justice Souter that the “50% rule,” which finds no support in the text, history, or purposes of §2, is not a proper part of the statutory vote dilution inquiry. For the reasons stated in my analysis of 'the “unique question of law . . . raised in this appeal,” supra, at 456, and in this, part of my opinion, however, it is so clear that the cracking of District 24 created an unconstitutional gerrymander that I find it unnecessary to address the statutory issue separately.
Like Justice Stevens, I agree with Justice Scalia that compliance with §5 is a compelling state interest. See ante, at 475, n. 12 (Stevens, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part); post, at 518-519 (Scalia, J., concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part).
Chief Justice Roberts, with whom Justice Alito joins, concurring in part, concurring in the judgment in part, and dissenting in part.
Justice Scalia, with whom Justice Thomas joins, and with whom The Chief Justice and Justice Alito join as to Part III, concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part.
I would dismiss appellants’ vote-dilution claims premised on § 2 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 for failure to state a claim, for the reasons set forth in Justice Thomas’s opinion, which I joined, in Holder v. Hall, 512 U. S. 874, 891-946 (1994) (opinion concurring in judgment). As The Chief Justice makes clear, see ante, p. 492 (opinion concurring in part, concurring in judgment in part, and dissenting in part), the Court’s § 2 jurisprudence continues to drift ever further from the Act’s purpose of ensuring minority voters equal electoral opportunities.
Justice Alito, with whom The Chief Justice, Justice Kennedy, and Justice Thomas join, dissenting.
In practical terms, our agreement on issues presented extends to a second point. Justice Kennedy understands that Clark raised an objection to confining mental-disease evidence to the insanity issue. As he sees it, Clark in effect claimed that in dealing with the issue of mens rea the trial judge should have considered expert testimony on what may characteristically go through the mind of a schizophrenic, when the judge considered what in fact was in Clark’s mind at the time of the shooting. See post, at 783 (dissenting opinion) (“[T]he opinion that Clark had paranoid schizophrenia—an opinion shared by experts for both the prosecution and defense—bears on efforts to determine, as a factual matter, whether he knew he was killing a police officer”). He thus understands that defense counsel claimed a right to rebut the State’s mens rea demonstration with testimony about how schizophrenics may hallucinate voices and other sounds, about their characteristic failure to distinguish the content of their imagination from what most people perceive as exterior reality, and so on. It is important to be clear that this supposed objection was not about dealing with testimony based on observation of Clark showing that he had auditory hallucinations when he was driving around, or failed in fact to appreciate objective reality when he shot; this objection went to use of testimony about schizophrenics, not about Clark in particular. While we might dispute how clearly Clark raised this objection, we have no doubt that the objection falls within a general challenge to the Mott rule; we understand that Mott is meant to confine to the insanity defense any consideration of characteristic behavior associated with mental disease, see 187 Ariz., at 544, 931 P. 2d, at 1054 (contrasting State v. Christensen, 129 Ariz. 32, 628 P. 2d 580 (1981), and State v. Gonzales, 140 Ariz. 349, 681 P. 2d 1368 (1984)). We will therefore assume for argument that Clark raised this claim, as we consider the due process challenge to the Mott rule.
Justice Kennedy, with whom Justice Stevens and Justice Ginsburg join, dissenting.
Even assuming the reliability and jury-confusion justifications were persuasive in some cases, they would not suffice here. It does not overcome the constitutional objection to say that an evidentiary rule that is reasonable on its face can be applied as well to bar significant defense evidence without any rational basis for doing so. In Van Arsdall, for example, the Court rejected the application of Delaware Rule of Evidence 403, which allows relevant evidence to be excluded where its probative value is substantially outweighed by the risk of unfair prejudice or other harms to the trial process. 475 U. S., at 676, and n. 2. While the Rule is well established and designed for a legitimate function, the Constitution prevented an application that deprived the defendant of all inquiry into an important issue. Id., at 679. Other cases have applied this same ease-specific analysis in deciding the legitimacy of an exclusion. See, e. g., Rock, 488 U. S., at 62 (the “circumstances present an argument for admissibility of petitioner’s testimony in this particular case, an argument that must be considered by the trial court”); Chambers v. Mississippi, 410 U. S. 284, 302 (1973) (“In these circumstances, where constitutional rights directly affecting the ascertainment of guilt are implicated, the hearsay rule may not be applied mechanistically to defeat the ends of justice”); cf. Scheffer, supra, at 318 (Kennedy, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment).
Justice Alito, with whom Justice Scalia joins, concurring.
I would also not assume, as Justice Breyer does, see post, at 22 (dissenting opinion), that Congress has implicitly delegated to the federal courts the task of deciding in the manner of a common-law court where the burden of persuasion should be allocated. The allocation of this burden is a debatable policy question with an important empirical component. In the absence of specific direction from Congress, cf. Fed. Rule Evid. 501, I would not assume that Congress has conferred this authority on the Judiciary.
Justice Breyer, with whom Justice Souter joins, dissenting.
Justice Black, writing for the plurality, contrasted the cases before him with the Insular Cases, which involved territories “with wholly dissimilar traditions and institutions” that Congress intended to govern only “temporarily.” Id., at 14. Justice Frankfurter argued that the “specific circumstances of each particular case” are relevant in determining the geographic scope of the Constitution. Id., at 54 (opinion concurring in result). And Justice Harlan, who had joined an opinion reaching the opposite result in the case in the previous Term, Reid v. Covert, 351 U. S. 487 (1956), was most explicit in rejecting a “rigid and abstract rule” for determining where constitutional guarantees extend. Reid, 354 U. S., at 74 (opinion concurring in result). He read the Insular Cases to teach that whether a constitutional provision has extraterritorial effect depends upon the “particular circumstances, the practical necessities, and the possible alternatives which Congress had before it” and, in particular, whether judicial enforcement of the provision would be “impracticable and anomalous.” Id., at 74-75; see also United States v. Verdugo-Urquidez, 494 U. S. 259, 277-278 (1990) (Kennedy, J., concurring) (applying the “impracticable and anomalous” extraterritoriality test in the Fourth Amendment context).
Indeed the majority splintered on this very point. The key disagreement between the plurality and the concurring Justices in Reid was over the continued precedential value of the Court’s previous opinion in In re Ross, 140 U. S. 453 (1891), which the Reid Court understood as holding that under some circumstances Americans abroad have no right to indictment and trial by jury. The petitioner in Ross was a sailor serving on an American merchant vessel in Japanese waters who was tried before an American consular tribunal for the murder of a fellow crewman. 140 U. S., at 459, 479. The Ross Court held that the petitioner, who was a British subject, had no rights under the Fifth and Sixth Amendments. Id., at 464. The petitioner’s citizenship played no role in the disposition of the case, however. The Court assumed (consistent with the maritime custom of the time) that Ross had all the rights of a similarly situated American citizen. Id., at 479 (noting that Ross was “under the protection and subject to the laws of the United States equally with the seaman who was native born”). The Justices in Reid therefore properly understood Ross as standing for the proposition that, at least in some circumstances, the jury provisions of the Fifth and Sixth Amendments have no application to American citizens tried by American authorities abroad. See 354 U. S., at 11-12 (plurality opinion) (describing Ross as holding that “constitutional protections applied ‘only to citizens and others within the United States . . . and not to residents or temporary sojourners abroad’” (quoting Ross, supra, at 464)); 354 U. S., at 64 (Frankfurter, J., concurring in result) (noting that the consular tribunals upheld in Ross “w[ere] based on long-established custom and they were justified as the best possible means for securing justice for the few Americans present in [foreign] countries”); 354 U. S., at 75 (Harlan, J., concurring in result) (“[W]hat Ross and the Insular Cases hold is that the particular local setting, the practical necessities, and the possible alternatives are relevant to a question of judgment, namely, whether jury trial should be deemed a necessary condition of the exercise of Congress’ power to provide for the trial of Americans overseas”).
The Reid plurality doubted that Ross was rightly decided, precisely because it believed the opinion was insufficiently protective of the rights of American citizens. See 354 U. S., at 10-12; see also id., at 78 (Clark, J., dissenting) (noting that “four of my brothers would specifically overrule and two would impair the long-recognized vitality of an old and respected precedent in our law, the case of In re Ross, 140 U. S. 453 (1891)”). But Justices Harlan and Frankfurter, while willing to hold that the American citizen petitioners in the cases before them were entitled to the protections of Fifth and Sixth Amendments, were unwilling to overturn Ross. 354 U. S., at 64 (Frankfurter, J., concurring in result); id., at 75 (Harlan, J., concurring in result). Instead, the two concurring Justices distinguished Ross from the cases before them, not on the basis of the citizenship of the petitioners, but on practical considerations that made jury trial a more feasible option for them than it was for the petitioner in Ross. If citizenship had been the only relevant factor in the case, it would have been necessary for the Court to overturn Ross, something Justices Harlan and Frankfurter were unwilling to do. See Verdugo-Urquidez, supra, at 277 (Kennedy, J., concurring) (noting that Ross had not been overruled).
Unlike in Hayman and Swain, here we confront statutes, the DTA and the MCA, that were intended to circumscribe habeas review. Congress’ purpose is evident not only from the unequivocal nature of MCA §7’s jurisdiction-stripping language, 28 U. S. C. § 2241(e)(1) (“No court, justice, or judge shall have jurisdiction to hear or consider an application for a writ of habeas corpus . .. ”), but also from a comparison of the DTA to the statutes at issue in Hayman and Swain. When interpreting a statute, we examine related provisions in other parts of the U. S. Code. See, e. g., West Virginia Univ. Hospitals, Inc. v. Casey, 499 U. S. 83, 88-97 (1991); Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter, Communities for Great Ore., 515 U. S. 687, 717-718 (1995) (Scalia, J., dissenting); see generally W. Eskridge, P. Frickey, & E. Garrett, Cases and Materials on Legislation: Statutes and the Creation of Public Policy 1039 (3d ed. 2001). When Congress has intended to replace traditional habeas corpus with habeas-like substitutes, as was the case in Hayman and Swain, it has granted to the courts broad remedial powers to secure the historic office of the writ. In the §2255 context, for example, Congress has granted to the reviewing court power to “determine the issues and make findings of fact and conclusions of law” with respect to whether “the judgment [of conviction] was rendered without jurisdiction, or . . . the sentence imposed was not authorized by law or otherwise open to collateral attack.” 28 U. S. C. § 2255(b) (2006 ed., Supp. II). The D. C. Court Reform Act, the statute upheld in Swain, contained a similar provision. § 23-110(g), 84 Stat. 609.
Even if we were to assume that the CSRTs satisfy due process standards, it would not end our inquiry. Habeas corpus is a collateral process that exists, in Justice Holmes’ words, to “cu[t] through all forms and g[o] to the very tissue of the structure. It comes in from the outside, not in subordination to the proceedings, and although every form may have been preserved opens the inquiry whether they have been more than an empty shell.” Frank v. Mangum, 237 U. S. 309, 346 (1915) (dissenting opinion). Even when the procedures authorizing detention are structurally sound, the Suspension Clause remains applicable and the writ relevant. See 2 Chambers, Course of Lectures on English Law 1767-1773, at 6 (“Liberty may be violated either by arbitrary imprisonment without law or the appearance of law, or by a lawful magistrate for an unlawful reason”). This is so, as Hayman and Swain make clear, even where the prisoner is detained after a criminal trial conducted in full accordance with the protections of the Bill of Rights. Were this not the case, there would have been no reason for the Court to inquire into the adequacy of substitute habeas procedures in Hayman and Swain. That the prisoners were detained pursuant to the most rigorous proceedings imaginable, a full criminal trial, would have been enough to render any habeas substitute acceptable per se.
Justice Souter, with whom Justice Ginsburg and Justice Breyer join, concurring.
Four years ago, this Court in Rasul v. Bush, 542 U. S. 466 (2004), held that statutory habeas jurisdiction extended to claims of foreign nationals imprisoned by the United States at Guantanamo Bay, “to determine the legality of the Executive’s potentially indefinite detention” of them, id., at 485. Subsequent legislation eliminated the statutory habeas jurisdiction over these claims, so that now there must be constitutionally based jurisdiction or none at all. Justice Scalia is thus correct that here, for the first time, this Court holds there is (he says “confers”) constitutional habeas jurisdiction over aliens imprisoned by the military outside an area of de jure national sovereignty, see post, at 826 (dissenting opinion). But no one who reads the Court’s opinion in Rasul could seriously doubt that the jurisdictional question must be answered the same way in purely constitutional cases, given the Court’s reliance on the historical background of habeas generally in answering the statutory question. See, e. g., 542 U. S., at 473, 481-483, and nn. 11-14. Indeed, the Court in Rasul directly answered the very historical question that Justice Scalia says is dispositive, see post, at 843; it wrote that “[application of the habeas statute to persons detained at [Guantanamo] is consistent with the historical reach of the writ of habeas corpus,” 542 U. S., at 481. Justice Scalia dismisses the statement as dictum, see post, at 846, but if dictum it was, it was dictum well considered, and it stated the view of five Members of this Court on the historical scope of the writ. Of course, it takes more than a quotation from Rasul, however much on point, to resolve the constitutional issue before us here, which the majority opinion has explored afresh in the detail it deserves. But whether one agrees or disagrees with today’s decision, it is no bolt out of the blue.
Chief Justice Roberts, with whom Justice Scalia, Justice Thomas, and Justice Alito join, dissenting.
Justice Scalia, with whom The Chief Justice, Justice Thomas, and Justice Alito join, dissenting.
The Court also relies on the “[practical considerations” that influenced our decision in Reid v. Covert, supra. See ante, at 759-762. But all the Justices in the majority except Justice Frankfurter limited their analysis to the rights of citizens abroad. See Reid, 354 U. S., at 5-6 (plurality opinion of Black, J.); id., at 74-75 (Harlan, J., concurring in result). (Frankfurter limited his analysis to the even narrower class of civilian dependents of American military personnel abroad, see id., at 45 (opinion concurring in result).) In trying to wring some kind of support out of Reid for today’s novel holding, the Court resorts to a chain of logic that does not hold. The members of the Reid majority, the Court says, were divided over whether In re Ross, 140 U. S. 453 (1891), which had (according to the Court) held that under certain circumstances American citizens abroad do not have indictment and jury-trial rights, should be overruled. In the Court’s view, the Reid plurality would have overruled Ross, but Justices Frankfurter and Harlan preferred to distinguish it. The upshot: “If citizenship had been the only relevant factor in the case, it would have been necessary for the Court to overturn Ross, something Justices Harlan and Frankfurter were unwilling to do.” Ante, at 761-762. What, exactly, is this point supposed to prove? To say that “practical considerations” determine the precise content of the constitutional protections American citizens enjoy when they are abroad is quite different from saying that “practical considerations” determine whether aliens abroad enjoy any constitutional protections whatever, including habeas. In other words, merely because citizenship is not a sufficient factor to extend constitutional rights abroad does not mean that it is not a necessary one.
It may be objected that the foregoing analysis proves too much, since this Court has already suggested that the writ of habeas corpus does run abroad for the benefit of United States citizens. “[T]he position that United States citizens throughout the world may be entitled to habeas corpus rights ... is precisely the position that this Court adopted in Eisentmger, see 339 U. S., at 769-770, even while holding that aliens abroad did not have habeas corpus rights.” Rasul, supra, at 501, 502 (Scalia, J., dissenting) (emphasis deleted). The reason for that divergence is not difficult to discern. The common-law writ, as received into the law of the new constitutional Republic, took on such changes as were demanded by a system in which rule is derived from the consent of the governed, and in which citizens (not “subjects”) are afforded defined protections against the Government. As Justice Story wrote for the Court:
Chief Justice Roberts, with whom Justice Scalia and Justice Thomas join as to all but Part I, dissenting.
Justice Thomas, with whom Justice Scalia joins, dissenting.
I join all but Part I of The Chief Justice’s dissent. I write separately to reiterate my view that Jackson v. Birmingham Bd. of Ed., 544 U. S. 167 (2005), incorrectly conflated the concepts of retaliation and discrimination. The text of the federal-sector provision of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 is clear: It prohibits only “discrimination based on age.” 29 U. S. C. §633a(a). If retaliation is not “discrimination on the basis of sex,” Jackson, supra, at 185 (Thomas, J., dissenting), or “discrimination based on race,” CBOCS West, Inc. v. Humphries, ante, at 459 (Thomas, J., dissenting), it is certainly not “discrimination based on age.” Because §633a(a) provides no basis for implying a private right of action for retaliation claims, and its context only reaffirms its plain meaning, see ante, at 496-500 (opinion of Roberts, C. J.), I would affirm the judgment below.
Suggesting that we have retreated from the reasoning of Sullivan and Jackson, The Chief Justice, citing Burlington N. & S. F. R. Co. v. White, 548 U. S. 53, 63-65 (2006), states that “we have since explained that anti-discrimination and antiretaliation provisions are indeed conceptually distinct, and serve distinct purposes.” Post, at 495 (dissenting opinion). But as the Court explains today in CBOCS West, Inc. v. Humphries, ante, at 456, “[i]n Burlington ... we used the status/conduct distinction to help explain why Congress might have wanted its explicit Title VII antiretaliation provision to sweep more broadly (i. e., to include conduct outside the workplace) than its substantive Title VII (status-based) antidiscrimination provision. Burlington did not suggest thát Congress must separate the two in all events.”
Regardless, the linguistic argument that CBOCS makes was apparent at the time the Court decided Sullivan. See 396 U. S., at 241 (Harlan, J., dissenting) (noting the construction of § 1982 in Jones, 392 U. S. 409, was “in no way required by [the statute’s] language” — one of the bases of Justice Harlan’s dissent in Jones — and further contending that the Court in Sullivan had gone “yet beyond” Jones). And we believe it is too late in the day in effect to overturn the holding in that case (nor does CBOCS ask us to do so) on the basis of a linguistic argument that was apparent, and which the Court did not embrace at that time.
Justice Thomas, with whom Justice Scalia joins, dissenting.
Of course, Sullivan is not a model of clarity, and Justice Harlan, writing in dissent, was correct to criticize the “undiscriminating manner” in which the Court dealt with Sullivan’s claims. Id., at 251. Sullivan had sought relief both for the corporation’s refusal to approve the assignment and for his expulsion. Id., at 253. But in stating that Sullivan had standing to maintain “this action,” id., at 237 (majority opinion), the Court did not specify what relief Sullivan was entitled to pursue on remand. Lamenting the Court’s “failure to provide any guidance as to the legal standards that should govern Sullivan’s right to recovery on remand,” id., at 252 (dissenting opinion), Justice Harlan provided an instructive summary of the ambiguities in the Court’s opinion:
The majority claims that Sullivan “did not embrace” this “linguistic argument.” Ante, at 453. That is because the argument was not before the Court. The corporation did not argue that § 1982’s text could not reasonably be construed to create a cause of action for retaliation; nor did Justice Harlan in dissent. No one made this argument because that was not how the issue was framed, either by Sullivan or by the Court. The majority suggests that the argument was “apparent at the time the Court decided Sullivan.” Ibid. But the only evidence it cites is Justice Harlan’s observation that the Court’s holding in Jones v. Alfred H. Mayer Co., 392 U. S. 409 (1968), that § 1982 prohibits private as well as governmental discrimination was “in no way required by [§ 1982’s] language.” Sullivan, 396 U. S., at 241 (dissenting opinion). I fail to see how that observation— or Justice Harlan’s further observation that the Court in Sullivan had gone “yet beyond Jones,” ibid. — shows that the Court considered and rejected the entirely different argument that § 1982’s text does not provide a cause of action for retaliation.
Justice Alito, with whom The Chief Justice and Justice Kennedy join, concurring.
Justice Souter, with whom Justice Stevens and Justice Ginsburg join, dissenting.
The Court in Hirota, however, may have found it significant, in considering the nature of the tribunal established by General MacArthur, that the Solicitor General expressly contended that General MacArthur, as pertinent, was not subject to United States authority. The facts suggesting that the tribunal in Hirota was subject to an “unbroken” United States chain of command were not among the “foregoing circumstances” cited in the per curiam opinion disposing of the case, id., at 198. They were highlighted only in Justice Douglas’s belated opinion concurring in the result, published five months after that per curiam. Id., at 199, n.*. Indeed, arguing before this Court, Solicitor General Perlman stated that General MacArthur did not serve “under the Joint Chiefs of Staff,” that his duty was “to obey the directives of the Far Eastern Commission and not our War Department,” and that “no process that could be issued from this court . . . would have any effect on his action.” Tr. of Oral Arg. in Hirota v. MacArthur, O. T. 1948, No. 239, pp. 42, 50, 51. Here, in contrast, the Government acknowledges that our military commanders do answer to the President.
The Judiciary is not suited to second-guess such determinations — determinations that would require federal courts to pass judgment on foreign justice systems and undermine the Government’s ability to speak with one voice in this area. See The Federalist No. 42, p. 279 (J. Cooke ed. 1961) (J. Madison) (“If we are to be one nation in any respect, it clearly ought to be in respect to other nations”). In contrast, the political branches are well situated to consider sensitive foreign policy issues, such as whether there is a serious prospect of torture at the hands of an ally, and what to do about it if there is. As Judge Brown noted, “we need not assume the political branches are oblivious to these concerns. Indeed, the other branches possess significant diplomatic tools and leverage the judiciary lacks.” 479 F. 3d, at 20, n. 6 (dissenting opinion).
Justice Souter, with whom Justice Ginsburg and Justice Breyer join, concurring.
At the time of our decision in Burns, the Guidelines were mandatory; the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984, §211 et seq., 98 Stat. 1987, prohibited district courts from disregarding “the mechanical dictates of the Guidelines” except in narrowly defined circumstances. 501 U. S., at 133. Confronted with the constitutional problems that might otherwise arise, we held that the provision of Rule 32 that allowed parties an opportunity to comment on the appropriate sentence — now Rule 32(i)(l)(C) — would be “rendered] meaningless” unless the defendant were given notice of any contemplated departure. Id., at 135-136. Justice Souter disagreed with our conclusion with respect to the text of Rule 32 and conducted a due process analysis. Id., at 147 (dissenting opinion).
with whom Justice Kennedy joins, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
For that matter, even without the PAC alternative, it would be untrue that §203 “banned” WRTL from saying anything a genuine issue ad would say, for WRTL could have availed itself of either or both of the following additional options. It is undisputed that WRTL’s ads could have been broadcast lawfully in the runup to the election (and bankrolled from WRTL’s general treasury) if Senator Feingold’s name had been omitted and the Senator not otherwise singled out. Since members of today’s majority apparently view WRTL’s broadcasts either as “genuine issue ad[s],” ante, at 470 (opinion of The Chief Justice), or as “lobby[ing] Wisconsin voters concerning the filibustering of the President’s judicial nominees,” ante, at 484 (Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment), a claim that omitting Senator Feingold’s name would “ban” WRTL’s message is specious. Yet one searches my Brothers’ opinions in vain for any persuasive reason why substituting the phrase “Contact your Senators” for the phrase “Contact Senators Feingold and Kohl” would have denied WRTL a constitutionally sufficient (and clearly lawful) alternative way to send its message. If WRTL is to be believed when it claims that the issue was the point of the ads, it would have lost nothing by referring simply to the “Senators.”
Cf. Austin v. Michigan Chamber of Commerce, 494 U. S. 652, 664 (1990) (First Amendment does not protect a nonprofit corporation from expenditure limits if the corporation accepts corporate and union contributions, lest corporations and unions readily “circumvent” restrictions on their own election spending “by funneling money through” nonprofits). Justice Scalia asserts that Austin “strayed far from” the principles we announced in First Nat. Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U. S. 765 (1978). Ante, at 489 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment). Bellotti, however, concerned corporate spending in connection with a referendum, and we went out of our way in that case to avoid casting any doubt upon the constitutionality of limiting corporate expenditures during candidate elections. We said:
Justice Alito’s concurrence at least hints that the principal opinion’s test may impermissibly chill speech, and offers to reconsider McConnell’s holding “[if] it turns out that the implementation of the as-applied standard set out in the principal opinion impermissibly chills political speech.” Ante, at 482 (emphasis added). The wait-and-see approach makes no sense and finds no support in our cases. How will we know that would-be speakers have been chilled and have not spoken? If a tree does not fall in the forest, can we hear the sound it would have made had it fallen? Our normal practice is to assess ex ante the risk that a standard will have an impermissible chilling effect on First Amendment protected speech. Justice Auto seemed to recognize that as recently as, well, today. In another opinion released this morning, he finds that a proposed test for censoring student speech “can easily be manipulated in dangerous ways,” wherefore he “would reject it before such abuse occurs.” Morse v. Frederick, ante, at 423 (concurring opinion) (emphasis added). I would accord the core First Amendment speech at issue here at least the same respect he accords speech in the classroom.
The same must be said, I think, of the test proposed by the principal opinion. While its coverage is not entirely clear, it would apparently protect even McConnell’s paradigmatic example of the functional equivalent of express advocacy — the so-called “Jane Doe ad,” which “condemned Jane Doe’s record on a particular issue before exhorting viewers to ‘call Jane Doe and tell her what you think,’” 540 U. S., at 126-127. Indeed, it at least arguably protects the most “striking” example of a so-called sham issue ad in the McConnell record, the notorious “Yellowtail ad,” which accused Bill Yellowtail of striking his wife and then urged listeners to call him and “[t]ell him to support family values.” Id., at 193-194, n. 78 (internal quotation marks omitted). The claim that §203 on its face does not reach a substantial amount of speech protected under the principal opinion’s test — and that the test is therefore compatible with McConnell— seems to me indefensible. Indeed, the principal opinion’s attempt at distinguishing McConnell is unpersuasive enough, and the change in the law it works is substantial enough, that seven Justices of this Court, having widely divergent views concerning the constitutionality of the restrictions at issue, agree tliat the opinion effectively overrules McConnell without saying so. See post, at 526-527 (Soutek, J., dissenting). This faux judicial restraint is judicial obfuscation.
These cases did not suggest, however, that the interest in combating “a different type of corruption” extended beyond campaign speech. Quite the contrary. Two of the Justices who joined the 6-to-3 majority in Austin relied, in upholding the constitutionality of the ban on campaign speech, on the fact that corporations retained freedom to speak on issues as distinct from election campaigns. See 494 U. S., at 675-678 (Brennan, J., concurring) (describing fact that campaign speech ban “does not regulate corporate expenditures in referenda or other corporate expression” as “reflecting] the requirements of our decisions”); id., at 678 (Stevens, J., concurring) (“[T]here is a vast difference between lobbying and debating public issues on the one hand, and political campaigns for election to public office on the other”). The McConnell Court similarly was willing to “assume that the interests that justify the regulation of campaign speech might not apply to the regulation of genuine issue ads.” 540 U. S., at 206, n. 88. And our decision in WRTL I reinforced the validity of that assumption by holding that BCRA §203 is susceptible to as-applied challenges. 546 U. S., at 412.
Justice Scalia thinks our test impermissibly vague. See post, at 492-494 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment). As should be evident, we agree with Justice Scalia on the imperative for clarity in this area; that is why our test affords protection unless an ad is susceptible of no reasonable interpretation other than as an appeal to vote for or against a specific candidate. It is why we emphasize that (1) there can be no free-ranging intent-and-effect test; (2) there generally should be no discovery or inquiry into the sort of “contextual” factors highlighted by the FEC and intervenors; (3) discussion of issues cannot be banned merely because the issues might be relevant to an election; and (4) in a debatable case, the tie is resolved in favor of protecting speech. And keep in mind this test is only triggered if the speech meets the bright-line requirements of BCRA §203 in the first place. Justice Scalia’s criticism of our test is all the more confusing because he accepts WRTL’s proposed three-prong test as “clear.” Post, at 498. We do not think our test any vaguer than WRTL’s, and it is more protective of political speech.
Justice Jackson’s familiar tripartite scheme provides the accepted framework for evaluating executive action in this area. First, “[wjhen the President acts pursuant to an express or implied authorization of Congress, his authority is at its maximum, for it includes all that he possesses in his own right plus all that Congress can delegate.” Youngstown, 343 U. S., at 635 (concurring opinion). Second, “[w]hen the President acts in absence of either a congressional grant or denial of authority, he can only rely upon his own independent powers, but there is a zone of twilight in which he and Congress may have concurrent authority, or in which its distribution is uncertain.” Id., at 637. In this circumstance, Presidential authority can derive support from “congressional inertia, indifference or quiescence.” Ibid.
The Court, however, changed its mind about the result in Foster four years later, after being shown a less legislatively oriented, less tentative, but equally authentic Spanish-language version of the treaty. See United States v. Percheman, 7 Pet. 51, 88-89 (1833). And by 1840, instances in which treaty provisions automatically became part of domestic law were common enough for one Justice to write that “it would be a bold proposition” to assert “that an act of Congress must be first passed” in order to give a treaty effect as “a supreme law of the land.” Lessee of Pollard’s Heirs v. Kibbe, 14 Pet. 353, 388 (1840) (Baldwin, J., concurring).
Indeed, the majority does not point to a single ratified United States treaty that contains the kind of “clea[r]” or “plai[n]” textual indication for which the majority searches. Ante, at 517,526. Justice Stevens’ reliance upon one ratified and one m-ratified treaty to make the point that a treaty could speak clearly on the matter of self-execution, see ante, at 533-534, and n. 1 (opinion concurring in judgment), does suggest that there are a few such treaties. But that simply highlights how few of them actually do speak clearly on the matter. And that is not because the United States never, or hardly ever, has entered into a treaty with self-executing provisions. The case law belies any such conclusion. Rather, it is because the issue whether further legislative action is required before a treaty provision takes domestic effect in a signatory nation is often a matter of how that nation’s domestic law regards the provision’s legal status. And that domestic status-determining law differs markedly from one nation to another. See generally Hollis, Comparative Approach to Treaty Law and Practice, in National Treaty Law and Practice 1, 9-50 (D. Hollis, M. Blakeslee, & L. Ederington eds. 2005) (hereinafter Hollis). As Justice Iredell pointed out 200 years ago, Britain, for example, taking the view that the British Crown makes treaties but Parliament makes domestic law, virtually always requires parliamentary legislation. See Ware, supra, at 274-277; Sinclair, Dickson, & Maciver, United Kingdom, in National Treaty Law and Practice, supra, at 727, 733, and n. 9 (in Britain, “‘treaties are not self-executing’” (citing Queen v. Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, ex parte Lord Rees-Mogg, [1994] Q. B. 552 (1993))). See also Torruella, The Insular Cases: The Establishment of a Regime of Political Apartheid, 29 U. Pa. J. Int’l L. 283, 337 (2007). On the other hand, the United States, with its Supremacy Clause, does not take Britain’s view. See, e, g., Ware, supra, at 277 (opinion of Iredell, J.). And the law of other nations, the Netherlands for example, directly incorporates many treaties concluded by the executive into its domestic law even without explicit parliamentary approval of the treaty. See Brouwer, The Netherlands, in National Treaty Law and Practice, supra, at 483, 483-502.
Justice Souter, with whom Justice Stevens, Justice Ginsburg, and Justice Breyer join, dissenting.
Justice Thomas, with whom The Chief Justice, Justice Scalia, and Justice Alito join as to Part III, dissenting.
Justice Alito, with whom The Chief Justice, Justice & alia, and Justice Thomas join, dissenting.
Justice Thomas, with whom Justice Scalia joins, dissenting.
The assertion by the majority, ante, at 475, n. 19, and Justice Auto, ante, at 484 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part), that the Court of Appeals did not address the merits of the sentencing issue at all is flatly wrong. See 492 F. 3d, at 757 (rejecting Cone’s Brady claim because the proffered evidence would not have altered the jury’s conclusion “that Cone’s prior drug use did not vitiate his specific intent to murder his victims and did not mitigate his culpability sufficient to avoid the death sentence” (emphasis added)).
Although the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, as interpreted by Brady, only mandates the disclosure of material evidence, the obligation to disclose evidence favorable to the defense may arise more broadly under a prosecutor's ethical or statutory obligations. See Kyles, 514 U. S., at 437 (“[T]he rule in Bagley (and, hence, in Brady) requires less of the prosecution than the ABA Standards for Criminal Justice____ See . .. Prosecution Function and Defense Function 3-3.11(a) (3d ed. 1993)”). See also ABA Model Rule of Professional Conduct 3.8(d) (2008) (“The prosecutor in a criminal case shall” “make timely disclosure to the defense of all evidence or information known to the prosecutor that tends to negate the guilt of the accused or mitigates the offense, and, in connection with sentencing, disclose to the defense and to the tribunal all unprivileged mitigating information known to the prosecutor, except when the prosecutor is relieved of this responsibility by a protective order of the tribunal”). As we have often observed, the prudent prosecutor will err on the side of transparency, resolving doubtful questions in favor of disclosure. See Kyles, 514 U. S., at 439; United States v. Bagley, 473 U. S. 667, 711, n. 4 (1985) (Stevens, J., dissenting); United States v. Agurs, 427 U. S. 97, 108 (1976).
Justice Stevens, with whom Justice Breyer joins, dissenting.
Justice Stevens, with whom Justice Ginsburg joins, dissenting.
Today’s decision is lamentable not only because of its flawed underpinnings, but also because it is another occasion in which the Court has privileged the prosecution at the expense of the Constitution. Permitting the State to cut corners in criminal proceedings taxes the legitimacy of the entire criminal process. “The State’s interest in truthseeking is congruent with the defendant’s interest in representation by counsel, for it is an elementary premise of our system of criminal justice ‘“that partisan advocacy on both sides of a case will best promote the ultimate objective that the guilty be convicted and the innocent go free.” ’ ” Harvey, 494 U. S., at 357 (Stevens, J., dissenting) (quoting United States v. Cronic, 466 U. S. 648, 655 (1984)). Although the Court may not be concerned with the use of ill-gotten evidence in derogation of the right to counsel, I remain convinced that such shabby tactics are intolerable in all cases. I respectfully dissent.
Justice Souter, with whom Justice Stevens joins, concurring.
Justice Breyer, with whom Justice Souter joins, concurring.
Contrary to Justice Breyer’s suggestion, this ease does not involve reading another “exceptio[n]” into 28 U. S. C. §1447(d)’s language. See post, at 645 (concurring opinion). Not, that is, if you think Thermtron was rightly decided. Unlike Osborn v. Haley, 549 U. S. 225 (2007), this case simply involves applying Thermtron’s in pari materia reading of § 1447(d) to the facts of this case.
Jackson was policy driven, and if that policy is being adequately served through other means, there is no reason to retain its rule. Miranda and the cases that elaborate upon it already guarantee not simply noncoercion in the traditional sense, but what Justice Harlan referred to as “voluntariness with a vengeance,” 384 U. S., at 505 (dissenting opinion). There is no need to take Jackson’s further step of requiring voluntariness on stilts.
This case is an exemplar of Justice Jackson’s oft quoted warning that this Court “is forever adding new stories to the temples of constitutional law, and the temples have a way of collapsing when one story too many is added.” Douglas v. City of Jeannette, 319 U. S. 157, 181 (1943) (opinion concurring in result). We today remove Michigan v. Jackson’s fourth story of prophylaxis.
Justice Alito, with whom Justice Kennedy joins, concurring.
Justice Stevens, with whom Justice Souter and Justice Ginsburg join, and with whom Justice Breyer joins except for footnote 5, dissenting.
Justice Thomas, with whom Justice Scalia joins, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice Stevens, with whom Justice Souter and Justice Ginsburg join, dissenting.
The dissenting justices would have upheld the search of Gant's car based on their view that “the validity of a Belton search . . . clearly does not depend on the presence of the Chimel rationales in a particular case.” Id., at 8, 162 P. 3d, at 647. Although they disagreed with the majority’s view of Belton, the dissenting justices acknowledged that “[t]he bright-line rule embraced in Belton has long been criticized and probably merits reconsideration.” 216 Ariz., at 10, 162 P. 3d, at 649. They thus “add[ed their] voice[s] to the others that have urged the Supreme Court to revisit Belton.” Id., at 11, 162 P. 3d, at 650.
Since we decided Belton, Courts of Appeals have given different answers to the question whether a vehicle must be within an arrestee’s reach to justify a vehicle search incident to arrest, but Justice Brennan’s reading of the Court’s opinion has predominated. As Justice O’Connor observed, “lower court decisions seem now to treat the ability to search a vehicle incident to the arrest of a recent occupant as a police entitlement rather than as an exception justified by the twin rationales of Chimel.” Thornton, 541 U. S., at 624 (opinion concurring in part). Justice Scalia has similarly noted that, although it is improbable that an arrestee could gain access to weapons stored in his vehicle after he has been handcuffed and secured in the backseat of a patrol car, cases allowing a search in “this precise factual scenario . . . are legion.” Id., at 628 (opinion concurring in judgment) (collecting cases). Indeed, some courts have upheld searches under Belton “even when . . . the handcuffed arrestee has already left the scene.” 541 U. S., at 628 (same).
Contrary to the State’s suggestion, a broad reading of Belton is also unnecessary to protect law enforcement safety and evidentiary interests. Under our view, Belton and Thornton permit an officer to conduct a vehicle search when an arrestee is within reaching distance of the vehicle or it is reasonable to believe the vehicle contains evidence of the offense of arrest. Other established exceptions to the warrant requirement authorize a vehicle search under additional circumstances when safety or evidentiary concerns demand. For instance, Michigan v. Long, 463 U. S. 1032 (1983), permits an officer to search a vehicle’s passenger compartment when he has reasonable suspicion that an individual, whether or not the arrestee, is “dangerous” and might access the vehicle to “gain immediate control of weapons.” Id., at 1049 (citing Terry v. Ohio, 392 U. S. 1, 21 (1968)). If there is probable cause to believe a vehicle contains evidence of criminal activity, United States v. Ross, 456 U. S. 798, 820-821 (1982), authorizes a search of any area of the vehicle in which the evidence might be found. Unlike the searches permitted by Justice Scalia’s opinion concurring in the judgment in Thornton, which we conclude today are reasonable for purposes of the Fourth Amendment, Ross allows searches for evidence relevant to offenses other than the offense of arrest, and the scope of the search authorized is broader. Finally, there may be still other circumstances in which safety or evidentiary interests would justify a search. Cf. Maryland v. Buie, 494 U. S. 325, 334 (1990) (holding that, incident to arrest, an officer may conduct a limited protective sweep of those areas of a house in which he reasonably suspects a dangerous person may be hiding).
Justice Auto’s dissenting opinion also accuses us of “overruling]” Belton and Thornton v. United States, 541 U. S. 615 (2004), “even though respondent Gant has not asked us to do so.” Post, at 355. Contrary to that claim, the narrow reading of Belton we adopt today is precisely the result Gant has urged. That Justice Auto has chosen to describe this decision as overruling our earlier cases does not change the fact that the resulting rule of law is the one advocated by respondent.
Justice Stevens concurred in the judgment in Belton, 453 U. S., at 463, for the reasons stated in his dissenting opinion in Robbins v. California, 453 U. S. 420, 444 (1981), Justice Thomas joined the Court’s opinion in Thornton, 541 U. S. 615, and Justice Scaua and Justice Ginsburg concurred in the judgment in that case, id., at 625.
Justice Alito insists that the Court must demand a good reason for abandoning prior precedent. That is true enough, but it seems to me ample reason that the precedent was badly reasoned and produces erroneous (in this case unconstitutional) results. See Payne v. Tennessee, 501 U. S. 808, 827 (1991). We should recognize Belton’s fanciful reliance upon officer safety for what it was: “a return to the broader sort of [evidence-gathering] search incident to arrest that we allowed before Chimel.” Thornton, supra, at 631 (Scalia, J., concurring in judgment).
Justice Alito argues that there is no reason to adopt a rule limiting automobile-arrest searches to those cases where the search’s object is evidence of the crime of arrest. Post, at 364 (dissenting opinion). I disagree. This formulation of officers’ authority both preserves the outcomes of our prior cases and tethers the scope and rationale of the doctrine to the triggering, event. Belton, by contrast, allowed searches precisely when its exigency-based rationale was least applicable: The fact of the arrest in the automobile context makes searches on exigency grounds less reasonable, not more. I also disagree with Justice Alito’s conclusory assertion that this standard will be difficult to administer in practice, post, at 360-361; the ease of its application in this ease would suggest otherwise.
To take the place of the overruled precedents, the Court adopts a new two-part rule under which a police officer who arrests a vehicle occupant or recent occupant may search the passenger compartment if (1) the arrestee is within reaching distance of the vehicle at the time of the search or (2) the officer has reason to believe that the vehicle contains evidence of the offense of arrest. Ante, at 351. The first part of this new rule may endanger arresting officers and is truly endorsed by only four Justices; Justice Scalia joins solely for the purpose of avoiding a “4-to-l-to-4 opinion.” Ante, at 354 (concurring opinion). The second part of the new rule is taken from Justice Scalia’s separate opinion in Thornton without any independent explanation of its origin or justification and is virtually certain to confuse law enforcement officers and judges for some time to come. The Court’s decision will cause the suppression of evidence gathered in many searches carried out in good-faith reliance on well-settled ease law, and although the Court purports to base its analysis on the landmark decision in Chimel v. California, 395 U. S. 752 (1969), the Court’s reasoning undermines Chimel. I would follow Belton, and I therefore respectfully dissent.
Contrary to the Court’s suggestion, however, Justice Brennan’s Belton dissent did not mischaracterize the Court’s holding in that case or cause that holding to be misinterpreted. As noted, the Belton Court explicitly stated precisely what it held. In Thornton, the Court recognized the scope of Belton’s holding. See 541 U. S., at 620. So did Justice Scalia’s separate opinion. See id., at 625 (opinion concurring in judgment) (“In [Belton] we set forth a bright-line rule for arrests of automobile occupants, holding that... a search of the whole [passenger] compartment is justified in every case”). So does Justice Scalia’s opinion in the present case. See ante, at 351 (Belton and Thornton held that “arresting officers may always search an arrestee’s vehicle in order to protect themselves from hidden weapons”). This “bright-line rule” has now been interred.
Bradwell upheld a State’s exclusion of women from the practice of law. In an exorbitant concurring opinion, Justice Bradley wrote that “the female sex [is] evidently unfijt]... for many of the occupations of civil life.” 16 Wall., at 141. He elaborated: “The paramount destiny and mission of woman are to fulfil the noble and benign offices of wife and mother. This is the law of the Creator.” Ibid.
Justice Stevens does not advocate a one-drug protocol but argues that “States wishing to decrease the risk that future litigation will delay executions or invalidate their protocols would do well to reconsider their continued use of pancuronium bromide” in the second step of the three-drug protocol. Post, at 77 (opinion concurring in judgment). But this very drug, pancuronium bromide, is recommended by the Royal Dutch Society for the Advancement of Pharmacy as the second of the two drugs to be used in cases of euthanasia. See Kimsma, Euthanasia and Euthanizing Drugs in The Netherlands, reprinted in Drug Use in Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia 193, 200, 204 (M. Battin & A. Lipman eds. 1996).
Misinterpretation of the standard set out in the plurality opinion or adoption of the standard favored by the dissent and Justice Breyer would create a grave danger of extended delay. The dissenters and Justice Breyer would hold that the protocol used in carrying out an execution by lethal injection violates the Eighth Amendment if it creates an “untoward, readily avoidable risk of inflicting severe and unnecessary pain.” See post, at 123 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting) (emphasis added); post, at 107 (Breyer, J., concurring in judgment). Determining whether a risk is “untoward,” we are told, requires a weighing of three factors — the severity of the pain that may occur, the likelihood of this pain, and the availability of alternative methods. Post, at 116 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting). We are further informed that “[t]he three factors are interrelated; a strong showing on one reduces the importance of the others.” Ibid.
“[A] penalty may be cruel and unusual because it is excessive and serves no valid legislative purpose.” Furman v. Georgia, 408 U. S. 238, 331 (1972) (Marshall, J., concurring); see also id., at 332 (“The entire thrust of the Eighth Amendment is, in short, against ‘that which is excessive’ ”). Our cases holding that certain sanctions are “excessive,” and therefore prohibited by the Eighth Amendment, have relied heavily on “objective criteria,” such as legislative enactments. See, e. g., Solem v. Helm, 463 U. S. 277, 292 (1983); Harmelin v. Michigan, 501 U. S. 957 (1991); United States v. Bajakajian, 524 U. S. 321 (1998). In our recent decision in Atkins v. Virginia, 536 U. S. 304 (2002), holding that death is an excessive sanction for a mentally retarded defendant, we also relied heavily on opinions written by Justice White holding that the death penalty is an excessive punishment for the crime of raping a 16-year-old woman, Coker v. Georgia, 433 U. S. 584 (1977), and for a murderer who did not intend to kill, Enmund v. Florida, 458 U. S. 782 (1982). In those opinions we acknowledged that “objective evidence, though of great importance, did not 'wholly determine’ the controversy, 'for the Constitution contemplates that in the end our own judgment will be brought to bear on the question of the acceptability of the death penalty under the Eighth Amendment.’ ” Atkins, 536 U. S., at 312 (quoting Coker, 433 U. S., at 597 (plurality opinion)).
Justice White was exercising his own judgment in 1972 when he provided the decisive vote in Furman, the case that led to a nationwide reexamination of the death penalty. His conclusion that death amounted to “cruel and unusual punishment in the constitutional sense” as well as the “dictionary sense,” rested on both an uncontroversial legal premise and on a factual premise that he admittedly could not “prove” on the basis of objective criteria. 408 U. S., at 312, 313 (concurring opinion). As a matter of law, he correctly stated that the “needless extinction of life with only marginal contributions to any discernible social or public purposes . . . would be patently excessive” and violative of the Eighth Amendment. Id., at 312. As a matter of fact, he stated, “like my Brethren, I must arrive at judgment; and I can do no more than state a conclusion based on 10 years of almost daily exposure to the facts and circumstances of hundreds and hundreds of federal and state criminal cases involving crimes for which death is the authorized penalty.” Id., at 313. I agree with Justice White that there are occasions when a Member of this Court has a duty to make judgments on the basis of data that falls short of absolute proof.
Our decisions in 1976 upholding the constitutionality of the death penalty relied heavily on our belief that adequate procedures were in place that would avoid the danger of discriminatory application identified by Justice Douglas’ opinion in Furman, id., at 240-257 (concurring opinion), of arbitrary application identified by Justice Stewart, id., at 306 (same), and of excessiveness identified by Justices Brennan and Marshall. In subsequent years a number of our decisions relied on the premise that “death is different” from every other form of punishment to justify rules minimizing the risk of error in capital cases. See, e. g., Gardner v. Florida, 430 U. S. 349,357-358 (1977) (plurality opinion). Ironically, however, more recent cases have endorsed procedures that provide less protections to capital defendants than to ordinary offenders.
In sum, just as Justice White ultimately based his conclusion in Furman on his extensive exposure to countless cases for which death is the authorized penalty, I have relied on my own experience in reaching the conclusion that the imposition of the death penalty represents “the pointless and needless extinction of life with only marginal contributions to any discernible social or public purposes. A penalty with such negligible returns to the State [is] patently excessive and cruel and unusual punishment violative of the Eighth Amendment.” Furman, 408 U. S., at 812 (White, J., concurring).
Justice Scalia, with whom Justice Thomas joins, concurring in the judgment.
I join the opinion of Justice Thomas concurring in the judgment. I write separately to provide what I think is needed response to Justice Stevens’ separate opinion.
Justice Stevens concludes as follows: “[T]he imposition of the death penalty represents the pointless and needless extinction of life with only marginal contributions to any discernible social or public purposes. A penalty with such negligible returns to the State [is] patently excessive and cruel and unusual punishment violative of the Eighth Amendment.” Ante, at 86 (opinion concurring in judgment) (internal quotation marks omitted; second bracket in original).
What prompts Justice Stevens to repudiate his prior view and to adopt the astounding position that a criminal sanction expressly mentioned in the Constitution violates the Constitution? His analysis begins with what he believes to be the “uncontroversial legal premise” that the “ 'extinction of life with only marginal contributions to any discernible social or public purposes ... would be patently excessive’ and violative of the Eighth Amendment.” Ante, at 83 (quoting in part Furman, supra, at 312 (White, J., concurring)); see also ante, at 78 (citing Gregg, supra, at 183, and n. 28). Even if that were uncontroversial in the abstract (and it is certainly not what occurs to me as the meaning of “cruel and unusual punishments”), it is assuredly controversial (indeed, flatout wrong) as applied to a mode of punishment that is explicitly sanctioned by the Constitution. As to that, the people have determined whether there is adequate contribution to social or public purposes, and it is no business of unelected judges to set that judgment aside. But even if we grant Justice Stevens his “uncontroversial premise,” his application of that premise to the current practice of capital punishment does riot meet the “heavy burden [that] rests on those who would attack the judgment of the representatives of the people.” Gregg, supra, at 175 (joint opinion of Stewart, Powell, and Stevens, JJ.). That is to say, Justice Stevens’ policy analysis of the constitutionality of capital punishment fails on its own terms.
But of all Justice Stevens’ criticisms of the death penalty, the hardest to take is his bemoaning of “the enormous costs that death penalty litigation imposes on society,” including the “burden on the courts and the lack of finality for victim’s families.” Ante, at 81, and n. 17. Those costs, those burdens, and that lack of finality are in large measure the creation of Justice Stevens and other Justices opposed to the death penalty, who have “encumber[ed] [it] . . . with unwarranted restrictions neither contained in the text of the Constitution nor reflected in two centuries of practice under it” — the product of their policy views “not shared by the vast majority of the American people.” Kansas v. Marsh, 548 U. S. 163, 186 (2006) (Scalia, J., concurring).
Justice Thomas, with whom Justice Scalia joins, concurring in the judgment.
The Eighth Amendment’s prohibition on the “inflict[ion]” of “cruel and unusual punishments” must be understood in light of the historical practices that led the Framers to include it in the Bill of Rights. Justice Stevens’ ruminations notwithstanding, see ante, at 78-86 (opinion concurring in judgment), it is clear that the Eighth Amendment does not prohibit the death penalty. That is evident both from the ubiquity of the death penalty in the founding era, see S. Banner, The Death Penalty: An American History 23 (2002) (hereinafter Banner) (noting that, in the late 18th century, the death penalty was “the standard penalty for all serious crimes”), and from the Constitution’s express provision for capital punishment, see, e. g., Arndt. 5 (requiring an indictment or presentment of a grand jury to hold a person for “a capital, or otherwise infamous crime,” and prohibiting deprivation of “life” without due process of law).
Justice Auto correctly points out that the Royal Dutch Society for the Advancement of Pharmacy recommends pancuronium bromide “as the second of the two drugs to be used in cases of euthanasia.” Ante, at 69 (concurring opinion). In the Netherlands, however, physicians with training in anesthesiology are involved in assisted suicide. For reasons Justice Alito details, see ante, at 64-66, physicians have no similar role in American executions. When trained medical personnel administer anesthesia and monitor the individual’s anesthetic depth, the serious risks that concern me are not presented.
Not a single Justice in Furman concluded that the mention of deprivation of “life” in the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments insulated the death penalty from constitutional challenge. The five Justices who concurred in the judgment necessarily rejected this argument, and even the four dissenters, who explicitly acknowledged that the death penalty was not considered impermissibly cruel at the time of the framing, proceeded to evaluate whether anything had changed in the intervening 181 years that nevertheless rendered capital punishment unconstitutional. Furman, 408 U. S., at 380-384 (Burger, C. J., joined by Blackmun, Powell, and Rehnquist, JJ., dissenting); see also id., at 420 (Powell, J., joined by Burger, C. J., and Blackmun and Rehnquist, JJ., dissenting) (“Nor are ‘cruel and unusual punishments’ and ‘due process of law’ static concepts whose meaning and scope were sealed at the time of their writing”). And indeed, the guarantees of procedural fairness contained in the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments do not resolve the substantive questions relating to the separate limitations imposed by the Eighth Amendment.
As Justice Frankfurter noted in a separate opinion based on the Due Process Clause, however, “a hypothetical situation” involving “a series of abortive attempts at electrocution” would present a different case. Id., at 471 (concurring opinion). In terms of our present Eighth Amendment analysis, such a situation — unlike an “innocent misadventure,” id., at 470 — would demonstrate an “objectively intolerable risk of harm” that officials may not ignore. See Farmer, 511 U. S., at 846, and n. 9. In other words, an isolated mishap alone does not give rise to an Eighth Amendment violation, precisely because such an event, while regrettable, does not suggest cruelty, or that the procedure at issue gives rise to a “substantial risk of serious harm.” Id., at 842.
Reasonable people of good faith disagree on the morality and efficacy of capital punishment, and for many who oppose it, no method of execution would ever be acceptable. But as Justice Frankfurter stressed in Resweber, “[o]ne must be on guard against finding in personal disapproval a reflection of more or less prevailing condemnation.” 329 U. S., at 471 (concurring opinion). This Court has ruled that capital punishment is not prohibited under our Constitution, and that the States may enact laws specifying that sanction. “[T]he power of a State to pass laws means little if the State cannot enforce them.” McCleskey v. Zant, 499 U. S. 467,491 (1991). State efforts to implement capital punishment must certainly comply with the Eighth Amendment, but what that Amendment prohibits is wanton exposure to “objectively intolerable risk,” Farmer, 511 U. S., at 846, and n. 9, not simply the possibility of pain.
Justice Thomas agrees that courts have neither the authority nor the expertise to function as boards of inquiry determining best practices for executions, see post, at 101 (opinion concurring in judgment) (quoting this opinion); post, at 105-106, but contends that the standard we adopt inevitably poses such concerns. In our view, those concerns are effectively addressed by the threshold requirement reflected in our cases of a ‘“substantial risk of serious harm’ ” or an “ ‘objectively intolerable risk of harm,’ ” see supra, at 50, and by the substantive requirements in the articulated standard.
Justice Stevens’s conclusion that the risk addressed by pancuronium bromide is “vastly outweighed” by the risk of pain at issue here, see post, at 73 (opinion concurring in judgment), depends, of course, on the magnitude of the risk of such pain. As explained, that risk is insignificant in light of the safeguards Kentucky has adopted.
Justice Souter claims that this understanding is “impossible to square with our conclusion in [Alexander v.] Gardner-Denver [Co., 415 U. S. 36 (1974),] that ‘Title VII... stands on plainly different ground’ from ‘statutory rights related to collective activity’: ‘it concerns not majoritarian processes, but an individual’s right to equal employment opportunities.’ ” Post, at 282 (dissenting opinion) (quoting Gardner-Denver, supra, at 51). As explained below, however, Justice Souter repeats the key analytical mistake made in Gardner-Denver’s dicta by equating the decision to arbitrate Title VII and ADEA claims to a decision to forgo these substantive guarantees against workplace discrimination. See infra, at 265-267. The right to a judicial forum is not the nonwaivable “substantive” right protected by the ADEA. See infra, at 259. Thus, although Title VII and ADEA rights may well stand on “different ground” than statutory rights that protect “majoritarian processes,” Gardner-Denver, supra, at 51, the voluntary decision to collectively bargain for arbitration does not deny those statutory antidiscrimination rights the full protection they are due.
Justice Stevens suggests that the Court is displacing its “earlier determination of the relevant provisions’ meaning” based on a “preference for arbitration.” Post, at 275. But his criticism lacks any basis. We are not revisiting a settled issue or disregarding an earlier determination; the Court is simply deciding the question identified in Wright as unresolved. See supra, at 255; see also infra, at 272-273. And, contrary to Justice Stevens’ accusation, it is the Court’s fidelity to the ADEA’s text — not an alleged preference for arbitration — that dictates the answer to the question presented. As Gilmer explained, nothing in the text of Title VII or the ADEA precludes contractual arbitration, see supra, at 258, and Justice Stevens has never suggested otherwise. Rather, he has always contended that permitting the “compulsory arbitration” of employment-discrimination claims conflicts with his perception of “the congressional purpose animating the ADEA.” Gilmer, 500 U. S., at 41 (Stevens, J., dissenting); see also id., at 42 (“Plainly, it would not comport with the congressional objectives behind a statute seeking to enforce civil rights protected by Title VII to allow the very forces that had practiced discrimination to contract away the right to enforce civil rights in the courts” (internal quotation marks omitted)). The Gilmer Court did not adopt Justice Stevens’ personal view of the purposes underlying the ADEA, for good reason: That view is not embodied within the statute’s text. Accordingly, it is not the statutory text that Justice Stevens has sought to vindicate — it is instead his own “preference” for mandatory judicial review, which he disguises as a search for congressional purpose. This Court is not empowered to incorporate such a preference into the text of a federal statute. See infra, at 270. It is for this reason, and not because of a “policy favoring arbitration,” see post, at 274, 275 (Stevens, J., dissenting), that the Court overturned Wilko v. Swan, 346 U. S. 427 (1953). And it is why we disavow the antiarbitration dicta of Gardner-Denver and its progeny today.
“In the final analysis, a Justice’s vote in a case like this depends more on his or her views about the respective lawmaking responsibilities of Congress and this Court than on conflicting policy interests. Judges who have confidence in their own ability to fashion public policy are less hesitant to change the law than those of us who are inclined to give wide latitude to the views of the voters’ representatives on noneonstitutional matters. Cf. Boyle v. United Technologies Corp., 487 U. S. 500 (1988). As I pointed out years ago, Alberto-Culver Co. v. Scherk, 484 F. 2d 611, 615-620 (CA7 1973) (dissenting opinion), rev’d, 417 U. S. 506 (1974), there are valid policy and textual arguments on both sides regarding the interrelation of federal securities and arbitration Acts. None of these arguments, however, carries sufficient weight to tip the balance between judicial and legislative authority and overturn an interpretation of an Act of Congress that has been settled for many years.” Rodriguez de Quijas, 490 U. S., at 487 (footnote and citation omitted).
Justice Souter, with whom Justice Stevens, Justice Ginsburg, and Justice Breyer join, dissenting.
The Pacifica decision, however it might fare on reassessment, see ante, at 535 (Thomas, J., concurring), was tightly cabined, and for good reason. In dissent, Justice Brennan observed that the Government should take care before enjoining the broadcast of words or expressions spoken by many “in our land of cultural pluralism.” 438 U. S., at 775. That comment, fitting in the 1970’s, is even more potent today. If the reserved constitutional question reaches this Court, see ante, at 529 (majority opinion), we should be mindful that words unpalatable to some may be “commonplace” for others, “the stuff of everyday conversations,” 438 U. S., at 776 (Brennan, J., dissenting).
Justice Breyer, with whom Justice Stevens, Justice Souter, and Justice Ginsburg join, dissenting.
Thirty years ago, the Court considered the location of that constitutional line. In FCC v. Pacifica Foundation, 438 U. S. 726 (1978), the Court reviewed an FCC decision forbidding the broadcast of a monologue that deliberately and repeatedly uttered the expletives here at issue more than 100 times in one hour at a time of day when children were likely to hear the broadcast. Id., at 739. The Court held that the FCC’s prohibition did not violate the First Amendment. But the Court divided 5 to 4. And two Members of the majority, Justices Powell and Blackmun, explicitly noted that the Court “does not speak to cases involving the isolated use of a potentially offensive word ... as distinguished from the verbal shock treatment administered by respondent here.” Id., at 760-761 (Powell, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (emphasis added). This statement by two Members of the majority suggested that they could reach a different result, finding an FCC prohibition unconstitutional, were that prohibition aimed at the fleeting or single use of an expletive.
The Court commits a second critical error by assuming that Pacifica endorsed a construction of the term “indecent,” as used in 18 U. S. C. § 1464, that would include any expletive that has a sexual or excretory origin. Neither the opinion of the Court, nor Justice Powell’s concurring opinion, adopted such a far-reaching interpretation. Our holding was narrow in two critical respects. First, we concluded, over the dissent of four Justices, that the statutory term “indecent” was not limited to material that had prurient appeal and instead included material that was in “nonconformance with accepted standards of morality.” Pacifica, 438 U. S., at 740. Second, we upheld the FCC’s adjudication that a 12-minute, expletive-filled monologue by satiric humorist George Carlin was indecent “as broadcast.” Id., at 735. We did not decide whether an isolated expletive could qualify as indecent. Id., at 750; id., at 760-761 (Powell, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment). And we certainly did not hold that any word with a sexual or scatological origin, however used, was indecent.
For these reasons and those stated in Justice Breyer’s dissenting opinion, I would affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals.
Justice Scalia erroneously concludes that treating the FCC’s rule-making authority as an exercise of legislative power would somehow be unconstitutional. See ante, at 524 (citing Bowsher v. Synar, 478 U. S. 714, 726 (1986)). But that is the nature of rulemaking: Rules promulgated by agencies (independent or not) carry the force of law precisely because they are exercises of such legislative authority. This may offend Justice Scalia’s theory of the “unitary Executive,” ante, at 526, but it does not offend the Constitution. Indeed, “the Framers vested ‘All legislative Powers’ in the Congress, Art. I, § 1, just as in Article II they vested the ‘executive Power’ in the President, Art. II, § 1. Those provisions do not purport to limit the authority of either recipient of power to delegate authority to others.” Whitman v. American Trucking Assns., Inc., 531 U. S. 457, 489 (2001) (Stevens, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment).
While Justice Thomas and I disagree about the continued wisdom of Pacifica, see ante, p. 530 (concurring opinion), the changes in technology and the availability of broadcast spectrum he identifies certainly counsel a restrained approach to indecency regulation, not the wildly expansive path the FCC has chosen.
Justice Stevens apparently recognizes this political control by Congress, and indeed sees it as the manifestation of a principal-agency relationship. In his judgment, the FCC is “better viewed as an agent of Congress” than as part of the Executive. Post, at 540 (dissenting opinion). He nonetheless argues that this is a good reason for requiring the FCC to explain “why its prior policy is no longer sound before allowing it to change course.” Post, at 541. Leaving aside the unconstitutionally of a scheme giving the power to enforce laws to agents of Congress, see Bowsher v. Synar, 478 U. S. 714, 726 (1986), it seems to us that Justice Stevens’ conclusion does not follow from his premise. If the FCC is indeed an agent of Congress, it would seem an adequate explanation of its change of position that Congress made clear its wishes for stricter enforcement, see n. 4, supra. The Administrative Procedure Act, after all, does not apply to Congress and its agencies.
Regardless, it is assuredly not “applicable law” that rule-making by independent regulatory agencies is subject to heightened scrutiny. The Administrative Procedure Act, which provides judicial review, makes no distinction between independent and other agencies, neither in its definition of agency, 5 U. S. C. § 701(b)(1), nor in the standards for reviewing agency action, § 706. Nor does any case of ours express or reflect the “heightened scrutiny” Justice Breyer and Justice Stevens would impose. Indeed, it is hard to imagine any closer scrutiny than that we have given to the Environmental Protection Agency, which is not an independent agency. See Massachusetts v. EPA, 549 U. S. 497, 533-535 (2007); Whitman v. American Trucking Assns., Inc., 531 U. S. 457, 481-486 (2001). There is no reason to magnify the separation-of-powers dilemma posed by the headless Fourth Branch, see Freytag v. Commissioner, 501 U. S. 868, 921 (1991) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment), by letting Article III judges — like jackals stealing the lion’s kill — expropriate some of the power that Congress has wrested from the unitary Executive.
Justice Breyer’s contention that State Farm did anything more, post, at 549-552 (dissenting opinion), rests upon his failure to observe the italicized phrase and upon a passage quoted in State Farm from a plurality opinion in Atchison, T. & S. F. R. Co. v. Wichita Bd. of Trade, 412 U. S. 800 (1973). That passage referred to “a presumption that [congressional] policies will be carried out best if the settled rule is adhered to.” Id., at 807-808 (opinion of Marshall, J.). But the Atchison plurality made this statement in the context of requiring the agency to provide some explanation for a change, “so that the reviewing court may understand the basis of the agency’s action and so may judge the consistency of that action with the agency’s mandate,” id., at 808. The opinion did not assert the authority of a court to demand explanation sufficient to enable it to weigh (by its own lights) the merits of the agency’s change. Nor did our opinion in State Farm.
Justice Breyer would remand for the additional reason of what he regards as the agency’s inadequate explanation of the change in its criterion for variances — from a relationship of costs to benefits that is “ ‘wholly disproportionate’” to one that is “‘significantly greater.’” Post, at 236 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). That question can have no bearing upon whether the EPA can use cost-benefit analysis, which is the only question presented here. It seems to us, in any case, that the EPA’s explanation was ample. It explained that the “wholly out of proportion” standard was inappropriate for the existing facilities subject to the Phase II rules because those facilities lack “the greater flexibility available to new facilities for selecting the location of their intakes and installing technologies at lower costs relative to the costs associated with retrofitting existing facilities,” and because “economically impracticable impacts on energy prices, production costs, and energy production . . . could occur if large numbers of Phase II existing facilities incurred costs that were more than ‘significantly greater’ than but not ‘wholly out of proportion’ to the costs in the EPA’s record.” 68 Fed. Reg. 13541 (2003).
Justice Stevens, with whom Justice Souter and Justice Ginsburg join, dissenting.
Justice Kennedy, with whom Justice Souter and Justice Ginsburg join, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
Justice Thomas, with whom Justice Scalia joins, concurring in the judgment.
Justice Souter, with whom Justice Stevens, Justice Ginsburg, and Justice Breyer join, dissenting.
Justice Stevens, with whom Justice Souter joins, dissenting.
The majority attempts to portray the Circuit Court Judge’s decision as so far outside the bounds of Alabama law, see ante, at 426, that allowing it to effectively establish the special election practice as a §5 baseline would be intolerable. I am certain, however, that the two Alabama Supreme Court Justices dissenting in Stokes would disagree. 534 So. 2d, at 239 (opinion of Steagall, J., joined by Adams, J.). The dissenting justices argued that the 1985 Act was sufficiently “amendatory” to avoid the requirements of Peddycoart v. Birmingham, 354 So. 2d 808 (Ala. 1978), because it merely amended the 1957 Act creating the Mobile County Commission. The Circuit Court Judge followed similar reasoning, citing Alabama Supreme Court precedent stating that “[i]t is the duty of the courts to sustain the constitutionality of a legislative act unless it is clear beyond a reasonable doubt that it is in violation of the fundamental law.” Stokes v. Noonan, No. CV-87-001316 (Mobile Cty., May 19, 1987). Nothing in the Circuit Court Judge’s decision indicates that this case calls for anything other than a straightforward application of our precedent.
Neither Discover nor The Chief Justice, concurring in part and dissenting in part (hereinafter dissent), defends the Fourth Circuit’s reasoning. Instead, the dissent insists that a federal court “would have” jurisdiction over “the controversy Discover seeks to arbitrate” — namely, “whether ‘Discover Bank charged illegal finance charges, interest and late fees.’ ” Post, at 72 (quoting App. 30). The dissent hypothesizes two federal suits that might arise from this purported controversy: “an action by Vaden asserting that the charges violate the FDIA, or one by Discover seeking a declaratory judgment that they do not.” Post, at 73.
Chief Justice Roberts, with whom Justice Stevens, Justice Breyer, and Justice Alito join, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
This statute’s silence with respect to a “federal” limitation in no way authorizes us to assume that such a limitation must be read into subsections (a) and (e) in order to blunt the slippery-slope policy arguments of those opposed to a plain-meaning construction of the provisions under review, see ante, at 188-190. And Congress’ silence certainly does not empower us to go even further and incorporate such an assumption into the text of these provisions. Post, at 205-207. Moreover, the Court should not decide a question irrelevant to this case in order to pre-empt the “problematic” results that might arise from a plain-text reading of the statutory provision under review. See ante, at 195 (Roberts, C. J., concurring in judgment). Whether or not The Chief Justice’s construction of the “subsequent stage of available judicial proceedings” clause of subsection (e) is correct, it is irrelevant to the proper interpretation of the clemency clause of subsection (e). Even if the statute were to authorize federal posteonviction counsel to appear in state proceedings other than state clemency proceedings, a question not resolved by today’s decision, that conclusion would not provide a legitimate basis for adopting the dissent’s atextual interpretation of the clemency clause of subsection (e). The “best” interpretation of the clemency clause does not turn on the unresolved breadth of the “subsequent stage of available judicial proceedings” clause.
Justice Scalia, with whom Justice Alito joins, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
See also Kansas v. Marsh, 548 U. S. 163, 193 (2006) (Scalia, J., concurring) (“Reversal of an erroneous conviction on appeal or on habeas, or the pardoning of an innocent condemnee through executive clemency, demonstrates not the failure of the system but its success. Those devices are part and parcel of the multiple assurances that are applied before a death sentence is carried out”); Dretke v. Haley, 541 U. S. 386, 399 (2004) (Kennedy, J., dissenting) (“Among its benign if too-often ignored objects, the clemency power can correct injustices that the ordinary criminal process seems unable or unwilling to consider”).
Justice Souter, with whom Justice Stevens joins, dissenting.
At the same time, dissimilar examples are not easy to find. The Government says that “knowingly” modifies only the verbs in the statute, while remaining indifferent to the subject’s knowledge of at least part of the transitive verb’s object. In certain contexts, a listener might understand the word “knowingly” to be used in that way. But the Government has not provided us with a single example of a sentence that, when used in typical fashion, would lead the hearer to believe that the word “knowingly” modifies only a transitive verb without the full object, i. e., that it leaves the hearer gravely uncertain about the subject’s state of mind in respect to the full object of the transitive verb in the sentence. The likely reason is that such sentences typically involve special contexts or themselves provide a more detailed explanation of background circumstances that call for such a reading. As Justice Alito notes, the inquiry into a sentence’s meaning is a contextual one. See post, at 661 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment). No special context is present here. See infra, at 654-657.
Justice Scalia, with whom Justice Thomas joins, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
But the Court is not content to stop at the statute’s text, and I do not join that further portion of the Court’s opinion. First, the Court relies in part on the principle that “courts ordinarily read a phrase in a criminal statute that introduces the elements of a crime with the word ‘knowingly’ as applying that word to each element.” Ante, at 652. If that is meant purely as a description of what most cases do, it is perhaps true, and perhaps not. I have not canvassed all the cases and am hence agnostic. If it is meant, however, as a normative description of what courts should ordinarily do when interpreting such statutes — and the reference to Justice Stevens’ concurring opinion in United States v. X-Citement Video, Inc., 513 U. S. 64, 79 (1994), suggests as much — then I surely do not agree. The structure of the text in X-Citement Video plainly separated the “use of a minor” element from the “knowingly” requirement, wherefore I thought (and think) that case was wrongly decided. See id., at 80-81 (Scalia, J., dissenting). It is one thing to infer the common-law tradition of a mens rea requirement where Congress has not addressed the mental element of a crime. See Staples v. United States, 511 U. S. 600, 605 (1994); United States v. United States Gypsum Co., 438 U. S. 422, 437-438 (1978). It is something else to expand a mens rea requirement that the statutory text has carefully limited.
Justice Souter, with whom The Chief Justice and Justice Stevens join, dissenting.
Four months later — a month after the petition for writ of certiorari was filed in this Court — Justice Benjamin filed a concurring opinion. He defended the merits of the majority opinion as well as his decision not to recuse. He rejected Caperton’s challenge to his participation in the case under both the Due Process Clause and West Virginia law. Justice Benjamin reiterated that he had no “ ‘direct, personal, substantial, pecuniary interest’ in this case.” 223 W. Va., at 702, 679 S. E. 2d, at 301 (quoting Lavoie, supra, at 822). Adopting “a standard merely of ‘appearances,’” he concluded, “seems little more than an invitation to subject West Virginia’s justice system to the vagaries of the day — a framework in which predictability and stability yield to supposition, innuendo, half-truths, and partisan manipulations.” 223 W. Va., at 707, 679 S. E. 2d, at 306.
The West Virginia Code of Judicial Conduct also requires a judge to “disqualify himself or herself in a proceeding in which the judge’s impartiality might reasonably be questioned.” Canon SE(1); see also 28 U. S. C. § 455(a) (“Any justice, judge, or magistrate judge of the United States shall disqualify himself in any proceeding in which his impartiality might reasonably be questioned”). Under Canon 3E(1), “‘[t]he question of disqualification focuses on whether an objective assessment of the judge’s conduct produces a reasonable question about impartiality, not on the judge’s subjective perception of the ability to act fairly.’” State ex rel. Brown v. Dietrick, 191 W. Va. 169, 174, n. 9, 444 S. E. 2d 47, 52, n. 9 (1994); see also Liteky v. United States, 510 U. S. 540, 558 (1994) (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment) (“[U]nder [28 U. S. C.] § 455(a), a judge should be disqualified only if it appears that he or she harbors an aversion, hostility or disposition of a kind that a fair-minded person could not set aside when judging the dispute”)- Indeed, some States require recusal based on campaign contributions similar to those in this ease. See, e. g., Ala. Code §§ 12-24-1,12-24-2 (2006); Miss. Code of Judicial Conduct, Canon 3E(2) (2008).
Chief Justice Roberts, with whom Justice Scalia, Justice Thomas, and Justice Alito join, dissenting.
Consider the cautionary tale of our decisions in United States v. Halper, 490 U. S. 435 (1989), and Hudson v. United States, 522 U. S. 93 (1997). Historically, we have held that the Double Jeopardy Clause only applies to criminal penalties, not civil ones. See, e. g., Helvering v. Mitchell, 303 U. S. 391, 398-400 (1938). But in Halper, the Court held that a civil penalty could violate the Clause if it were “overwhelmingly disproportionate to the damages [the defendant] has caused” and resulted in a “clear injustice.” 490 U. S., at 446, 449. We acknowledged that this inquiry would not be an “exact pursuit,” but the Court assured litigants that it was only announcing “a rule for the rare case, the case such as the one before us.” Id., at 449; see also id., at 453 (Kennedy, J., concurring) (“Today’s holding, I would stress, constitutes an objective rule that is grounded in the nature of the sanction and the facts of the particular ease”).
Moreover, Blankenship’s independent expenditures do not appear “grossly disproportionate” compared to other such expenditures in this very election. “And for the Sake of the Kids” — an independent group that received approximately two-thirds of its funding from Blankenship — spent $3,623,500 in connection with the election. 223 W. Va. 624, 704-705, 679 S. E. 2d 223, 303-304 (2008) (Benjamin, Acting C. J., concurring). But large independent expenditures were also made in support of Justice Benjamin’s opponent. “Consumers for Justice” — an independent group that received large contributions from the plaintiffs’ bar — spent approximately $2 million in this race. Id., at 704, n. 41, 679 S. E. 2d, at 303, n. 41. And Blankenship has made large expenditures in connection with several previous West Virginia elections, which undercuts any notion that his involvement in this election was “intended to influence the outcome” of particular pending litigation. Brief for Petitioners 29.
Chief Justice Roberts, with whom Justice Scalia, Justice Thomas, and Justice Alito join, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
Legal doctrines “must be placed in their historical setting. They cannot be wrenched from it and mechanically transplanted into an alien, unrelated context without suffering mutilation or distortion.” Reid, 354 U. S., at 50 (Frankfurter, J., concurring in result). The Article III courts have been given broad jurisdiction. I can understand, if not necessarily agree with, the notion that they might enjoy some implicit “long-recognized authority” to correct their earlier judgments. See ante, at 916. But not so for Article I courts. The principle that Congress defines the jurisdiction of the lower federal courts “applies with added force to Article I tribunals.” Ante, at 912. That is especially true with respect to military courts. The military justice system is the last place courts should go about finding “extensions” of jurisdiction beyond that conferred by statute.
Previously, courts followed the common-law “home port” doctrine, pursuant to which a ship could be taxed only by the State in which its owner was domiciled. See Pullman’s Palace Car Co. v. Pennsylvania, 141 U. S. 18, 23-24 (1891). That doctrine has since “yielded to a rule of fair apportionment among the States,” permitting any jurisdiction with which a ship has had sufficient contacts to establish a tax situs to levy a property tax on the ship in proportion to the ship’s contacts with the jurisdiction. See Japan Line, Ltd. v. County of Los Angeles, 441 U. S. 434, 442-443 (1979); see also Standard Oil Co. v. Peck, 342 U. S. 382, 383 (1952). We have roundly rejected the doctrine in cases involving ships moving in interstate operations along the inland waters. See ibid. And in the context of ocean-going ships, we have referred to the doctrine as “‘anachronistic’” and all but “ ‘abandoned,’ ” noting that “to rehabilitate the ‘home port doctrine’ as a tool of Commerce Clause analysis would be somewhat odd.” Japan Line, 441 U. S., at 443. In light of these developments, it is odd indeed that The Chief Justice endeavors to distinguish Transportation Co. v. Wheeling, 99 U. S. 273 (1879), and the State Tonnage Tax Cases, 12 Wall. 204 (1871), as “applying] only to taxation of property owned by citizens of the State.” See ante, at 18 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment).
Both the plurality and Justice Stevens suggest that the evolution of the “home port doctrine” sheds light on how to read the Tonnage Clause. See ante, at 15-16; post, at 22, n. 1 (dissenting opinion). I disagree. Under the home port doctrine, Polar Tankers “could not be taxed in [Valdez] at all,” even if the tax were not a tonnage duty. Japan Line, Ltd. v. County of Los Angeles, 441 U. S. 434, 442 (1979); Hays v. Pacific Mail S. S. Co., 17 How. 596, 599 (1855). In contrast, the Tonnage Clause forbids only tonnage duties, and would permit Valdez to impose other taxes on visiting ships — for example, “a reasonable charge for” the service of “policing of a harbor.” Clyde Mallory Lines v. Alabama ex rel. State Docks Comm’n, 296 U. S. 261, 267, 266 (1935). The demise of the home port doctrine is in no way inconsistent with reading the Tonnage Clause, as written, to ban all tonnage duties. See Japan Line, supra, at 439, n. 3 (rejecting home port doctrine while expressly not reaching Tonnage Clause argument).
The Chief Justice contends that a State may never impose a property tax on a vessel belonging to a citizen of another State, even if that vessel is taxed in the “same manner” as other personal property in the taxing State. See post, at 17-18 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment). But, as The Chief Justice concedes, this Court held in the State Tonnage Tax Cases and Wheeling that vessels belonging to a State’s own citizens may be subject to a property tax when the vessels are taxed in the same manner as other personal property owned by citizens of that State. At the time those cases were decided, the home port doctrine was still in effect, which meant that vessels were taxable solely by the owner’s domicil State. Since the State Tonnage Tax Cases and Wheeling, the home port doctrine has been abandoned, and States are now permitted to tax vessels belonging to citizens of other States that develop a tax situs in the nondomiciliary State, provided the tax is fairly apportioned. See, e.g., Ott v. Mississippi Valley Barge Line Co., 336 U. S. 169, 172-174 (1949); Japan Line, 441 U. S., at 442-443. Given this evolution in the law governing interstate taxation since our decisions in the State Tonnage Tax Cases and Wheeling, there is little reason to think that the ability of a State to tax vessels in the “same manner” as other personal property applies only to vessels owned by citizens of the taxing State. In any event, we need not decide this issue because it is clear that the vessels subject to the City’s ordinance are not taxed in the same manner as other personal property.
Justice Kennedy, with whom Justice Scalia joins, concurring.
Justice Alito, with whom Justice Thomas joins, dissenting.
Justice Breyer, with whom Justice Stevens joins, dissenting.
Justice Sotomayor, with whom Justice Ginsburg and Justice Breyer join, dissenting.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice SOTOMAYOR and Justice KAGAN join, concurring in the judgment.
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice ALITO joins, dissenting.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, dissenting.
Justice KAGAN, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice BREYER, and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment.
Justice ALITO, concurring in the judgment.
In his concurrence, Justice ALITO argues that one of FEGLIA's purposes is to "effectuat[e] ... the insured's expressed intent " and that evidence beyond an employee's named beneficiary could therefore be relevant in some circumstances to determining that intent. Post, at 1955 - 1956 (opinion concurring in judgment) (emphasis in original). For the reasons explained, however, that statement of Congress' purpose is incomplete. See supra, at 1946 - 1952. Congress sought to ensure that an employee's intent would be given effect only through the designation of a beneficiary or through the narrow exceptions specifically provided in the statute, see infra, at 1953 - 1954.
Justice SCALIA, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice THOMAS, and Justice ALITO join, dissenting.
In Eastern Enterprises, supra, the United States retroactively imposed on a former mining company an obligation to pay for the medical benefits of retired miners and their families. A four-Justice plurality concluded that the statute's imposition of retroactive financial liability was so arbitrary that it violated the Takings Clause. Id., at 529-537, 118 S.Ct. 2131. Although Justice KENNEDY concurred in the result on due process grounds, he joined four other Justices in dissent in arguing that the Takings Clause does not apply to government-imposed financial obligations that "d[o] not operate upon or alter an identified property interest." Id., at 540, 118 S.Ct. 2131 (opinion concurring in judgment and dissenting in part); see id., at 554-556, 118 S.Ct. 2131 (BREYER, J., dissenting) ("The 'private property' upon which the [Takings] Clause traditionally has focused is a specific interest in physical or intellectual property"). Relying on the concurrence and dissent in Eastern Enterprises, respondent argues that a requirement that petitioner spend money improving public lands could not give rise to a taking.
Second, our cases show that teasing out the difference between taxes and takings is more difficult in theory than in practice. Brown is illustrative. Similar to respondent in this case, the respondents in Brown argued that extending the protections of the Takings Clause to a bank account would open a Pandora's Box of constitutional challenges to taxes. Brief for Respondents Washington Legal Foundation et al. 32 and Brief for Respondent Justices of the Washington Supreme Court 22, in Brown v. Legal Foundation of Wash ., O.T. 2002, No. 01-1325. But also like respondent here, the Brown respondents never claimed that they were exercising their power to levy taxes when they took the petitioners' property. Any such argument would have been implausible under state law; in Washington, taxes are levied by the legislature, not the courts. See 538 U.S., at 242, n. 2, 123 S.Ct. 1406 (SCALIA, J., dissenting).
Justice KAGAN, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice BREYER, and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.
But we have already answered that question no. Eastern Enterprises v. Apfel, 524 U.S. 498, 118 S.Ct. 2131, 141 L.Ed.2d 451, as the Court describes, involved a federal statute requiring a former mining company to pay a large sum of money for the health benefits of retired employees. Five Members of the Court determined that the law did not effect a taking, distinguishing between the appropriation of a specific property interest and the imposition of an order to pay money. Justice KENNEDY acknowledged in his controlling opinion that the statute "impose[d] a staggering financial burden" (which influenced his conclusion that it violated due process). Id., at 540, 118 S.Ct. 2131 (opinion concurring in judgment and dissenting in part). Still, Justice KENNEDY explained, the law did not effect a taking because it did not "operate upon or alter" a "specific and identified propert[y] or property right [ ]." Id., at 540-541, 118 S.Ct. 2131. Instead, "[t]he law simply imposes an obligation to perform an act, the payment of benefits. The statute is indifferent as to how the regulated entity elects to comply or the property it uses to do so." Id., at 540, 118 S.Ct. 2131. Justice BREYER, writing for four more Justices, agreed. He stated that the Takings Clause applies only when the government appropriates a "specific interest in physical or intellectual property" or "a specific, separately identifiable fund of money"; by contrast, the Clause has no bearing when the government imposes "an ordinary liability to pay money." Id., at 554-555, 118 S.Ct. 2131 (dissenting opinion). Thus, a requirement that a person pay money to repair public wetlands is not a taking. Such an order does not affect a "specific and identified propert[y] or property right[ ]"; it simply "imposes an obligation to perform an act" (the improvement of wetlands) that costs money. Id., at 540-541, 118 S.Ct. 2131 (opinion of KENNEDY, J.). To be sure, when a person spends money on the government's behalf, or pays money directly to the government, it "will reduce [his] net worth"-but that "can be said of any law which has an adverse economic effect" on someone. Id., at 543, 118 S.Ct. 2131. Because the government is merely imposing a "general liability" to pay money, id., at 555, 118 S.Ct. 2131 (BREYER, J., dissenting)-and therefore is "indifferent as to how the regulated entity elects to comply or the property it uses to do so," id., at 540, 118 S.Ct. 2131 (opinion of KENNEDY, J.)-the order to repair wetlands, viewed independent of the permitting process, does not constitute a taking. And that means the order does not trigger the Nollan - Dolan test, because it does not force Koontz to relinquish a constitutional right.
Justice BREYER, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice KENNEDY and Justice ALITO join, dissenting.
Gonzales v. Oregon, 546 U.S. 243, 126 S.Ct. 904, 163 L.Ed.2d 748 (2006), is in the same line of precedent. In that case, as here, deference turned on whether a congressional delegation of interpretive authority reached a particular statutory ambiguity. The Attorney General claimed Chevron deference for his interpretation of the phrase " legitimate medical purpose" in the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) to exclude the prescribing and dispensing of controlled substances for the purpose of assisting suicide. Id., at 254, 258, 126 S.Ct. 904. No one disputed that "legitimate medical purpose" was "ambiguous in the relevant sense." Id., at 258, 126 S.Ct. 904. Nor did any Justice dispute that the Attorney General had been granted the power in the CSA to promulgate rules with the force of law. Ibid. ; see id., at 281, 126 S.Ct. 904 (SCALIA, J., dissenting). Nevertheless, the Court explained, "Chevron deference ... is not accorded merely because the statute is ambiguous and an administrative official is involved." Id., at 258, 126 S.Ct. 904. The regulation advancing the interpretation, we said, "must be promulgated pursuant to authority Congress has delegated to the official." Ibid. (citing Mead,supra, at 226-227, 121 S.Ct. 2164).
Justice KAGAN, with whom Justice GINSBURG and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, concurring.
Justice ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice KENNEDY, and Justice BREYER join, dissenting.
Abood does not seem to have anticipated the magnitude of the practical administrative problems that would result in attempting to classify public-sector union expenditures as either "chargeable" (in Abood 's terms, expenditures for "collective-bargaining, contract administration, and grievance-adjustment purposes," id., at 232, 97 S.Ct. 1782) or nonchargeable ( i.e., expenditures for political or ideological purposes, id., at 236, 97 S.Ct. 1782). In the years since Abood, the Court has struggled repeatedly with this issue. See Ellis v. Railway Clerks, 466 U.S. 435, 104 S.Ct. 1883, 80 L.Ed.2d 428 (1984); Teachers v. Hudson, 475 U.S. 292, 106 S.Ct. 1066, 89 L.Ed.2d 232 (1986); Lehnert v. Ferris Faculty Assn., 500 U.S. 507, 111 S.Ct. 1950, 114 L.Ed.2d 572 (1991); Locke v. Karass, 555 U.S. 207, 129 S.Ct. 798, 172 L.Ed.2d 552 (2009). In Lehnert, the Court held that "chargeable activities must (1) be 'germane' to collective-bargaining activity; (2) be justified by the government's vital policy interest in labor peace and avoiding 'free riders'; and (3) not significantly add to the burdening of free speech that is inherent in the allowance of an agency or union shop." 500 U.S., at 519, 111 S.Ct. 1950. But as noted in Justice SCALIA's dissent in that case, "each one of the three 'prongs' of the test involves a substantial judgment call (What is 'germane'? What is 'justified'? What is a 'significant' additional burden)." Id., at 551, 111 S.Ct. 1950 (opinion concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part).
Justice KAGAN, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice BREYER, and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.
But that view of the First Amendment interests at stake blinks decades' worth of this Court's precedent. Our decisions (tracing from Pickering as well as Abood ) teach that internal workplace speech about public employees' wages, benefits, and such-that is, the prosaic stuff of collective bargaining-does not become speech of "public concern" just because those employment terms may have broader consequence. To the contrary, we have made clear that except in narrow circumstances we will not allow an employee to make a "federal constitutional issue" out of basic "employment matters, including working conditions, pay, discipline, promotions, leave, vacations, and terminations." Borough of Duryea v. Guarnieri, 564 U.S. ----, ----, 131 S.Ct. 2488, 2496, 180 L.Ed.2d 408 (2011); see Umbehr, 518 U.S., at 675, 116 S.Ct. 2342 (public employees' "speech on merely private employment matters is unprotected"). Indeed, even Abood 's original detractors conceded that an employee's interest in expressing views, within the workplace context, about "narrowly defined economic issues [like] salaries and pension benefits" is "relatively insignificant" and "weak." 431 U.S., at 263, n. 16, 97 S.Ct. 1782 (Powell, J., concurring in judgment). (Those Justices saved their fire for teachers' speech relating to education policy. See ibid.) And nowhere has the Court ever suggested, as the majority does today, see ante, at 2642 and n. 28, that if a certain dollar amount is at stake (but how much, exactly?), the constitutional treatment of an employee's expression becomes any different.
Only four Justices fully agreed with this approach, but a fifth, Justice Douglas, went along due to "the practical problem of mustering five Justices for a judgment in this case." Id., at 778-779, 81 S.Ct. 1784 (concurring opinion).
The Abood majority cited Pickering once, in a footnote, for the proposition that "there may be limits on the extent to which an employee in a sensitive or policymaking position may freely criticize his superiors and the policies they espouse." 431 U.S., at 230, n. 27, 97 S.Ct. 1782. And it was cited once in Justice Powell's concurrence, for the uncontroversial proposition that " 'the State has interests as an employer in regulating the speech of its employees that differ significantly from those it possesses in connection with regulation of the speech of the citizenry in general.' " Id., at 259, 97 S.Ct. 1782 (opinion concurring in judgment) (quoting Pickering, 391 U.S., at 568, 88 S.Ct. 1731).United States v. United Foods, Inc., 533 U.S. 405, 121 S.Ct. 2334, 150 L.Ed.2d 438 (2001), cited Pickering only once-in dissent. 533 U.S., at 425, 121 S.Ct. 2334 (opinion of BREYER, J.). Neither Roberts v. United StatesJaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 104 S.Ct. 3244, 82 L.Ed.2d 462 (1984), nor Knox cited Pickering a single time.
Nor can it be correct to say that "Harris in no way strengthens the force of stare decisis in this case" because a " 'majority of the Court expressly disagreed with the rationale of [a] plurality.' " Ante, at 2165 - 2166 (SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring) (quoting Seminole Tribe of Fla. v. Florida, 517 U.S. 44, 66, 116 S.Ct. 1114, 134 L.Ed.2d 252 (1996) ). Decisions in which no one rationale commands a majority of the Court-including prominent decisions based on the views of a single Justice-are often thought to have precedential effect. See, e.g., United States v. Booker, 543 U.S. 220, 125 S.Ct. 738, 160 L.Ed.2d 621 (2005) ; Regents of Univ. of Cal. v. Bakke, 438 U.S. 265, 269-272, 98 S.Ct. 2733, 57 L.Ed.2d 750 (1978) (opinion of Powell, J.). And, of course, if Harris is not entitled to stare decisis weight, then neither is the Court's opinion in this case. After all, only four Members of the Court think that the Court's holding is the correct reading of the Constitution. See ante, at 2164 - 2165 (BREYER, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment).
In short, other than the fact that there are currently five Justices willing to vote to overrule Harris, and not five Justices willing to overrule Apprendi, there is no compelling reason why the Court overrules the former rather than the latter. If the opportunity arises in the future to overrule Apprendi or the present case-both of which presumably involve "procedural rules ... that do not govern primary conduct and do not implicate the reliance interests of private parties," ante, at 2164 (SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring)-the precedent the Court sets today will be relevant to the issue of stare decisis .
Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, concurring in the judgment.
Selectively referring to the trial court record in Perkins (as summarized in an opinion of the intermediate appellate court), Justice SOTOMAYOR posits that Benguet may have had extensive operations in places other than Ohio. See post, at 769 - 770, n. 8 (opinion concurring in judgment) ("By the time the suit [in Perkins ] was commenced, the company had resumed its considerable operations in the Philippines," "rebuilding its properties there" and "purchasing machinery, supplies and equipment." (internal quotation marks omitted)). See also post, at 767, n. 5 (many of the corporation's "key management decisions" were made by the out-of-state purchasing agent and chief of staff). Justice SOTOMAYOR's account overlooks this Court's opinion in Perkins and the point on which that opinion turned: All of Benguet's activities were directed by the company's president from within Ohio. See Perkins v. Benguet Consol. Mining Co., 342 U.S. 437, 447-448, 72 S.Ct. 413, 96 L.Ed. 485 (1952) (company's Philippine mining operations "were completely halted during the occupation ... by the Japanese"; and the company's president, from his Ohio office, "supervised policies dealing with the rehabilitation of the corporation's properties in the Philippines and ... dispatched funds to cover purchases of machinery for such rehabilitation"). On another day, Justice SOTOMAYOR joined a unanimous Court in recognizing: "To the extent that the company was conducting any business during and immediately after the Japanese occupation of the Philippines, it was doing so in Ohio...." Goodyear Dunlop Tires Operations, S.A. v. Brown, 564 U.S. ----, ----, 131 S.Ct. 2846, 2856, 180 L.Ed.2d 796 (2011). Given the wartime circumstances, Ohio could be considered "a surrogate for the place of incorporation or head office." von Mehren & Trautman 1144. See also ibid. (Perkins "should be regarded as a decision on its exceptional facts, not as a significant reaffirmation of obsolescing notions of general jurisdiction" based on nothing more than a corporation's "doing business" in a forum).
To clarify in light of Justice SOTOMAYOR's opinion concurring in the judgment, the general jurisdiction inquiry does not "focu[s] solely on the magnitude of the defendant's in-state contacts." Post, at 767. General jurisdiction instead calls for an appraisal of a corporation's activities in their entirety, nationwide and worldwide. A corporation that operates in many places can scarcely be deemed at home in all of them. Otherwise, "at home" would be synonymous with "doing business" tests framed before specific jurisdiction evolved in the United States. See von Mehren & Trautman 1142-1144. Nothing in International Shoe and its progeny suggests that "a particular quantum of local activity" should give a State authority over a "far larger quantum of ... activity" having no connection to any in-state activity. Feder, supra, at 694.
Justice Kennedy, with whom Justice Thomas, Justice Alito, and Justice Sotomayor join, concurring.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, dissenting.
Apel also relies on the fact that some Executive Branch documents, including the United States Attorneys' Manual and opinions of the Air Force Judge Advocate General, have said that § 1382 requires exclusive possession. Brief for Respondent 44-47. So they have, and that is a point in his favor. But those opinions are not intended to be binding. See Dept. of Justice, United States Attorneys' Manual § 1-1.100 (2009) ("The Manual provides only internal Department of Justice guidance. It is not intended to, does not, and may not be relied upon to create any rights, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by any party in any matter civil or criminal"); 2 Civil Law Opinions of The Judge Advocate General, United States Air Force 1978-1983 (Preface) (opinions of the Judge Advocate General "are good starting points but should not be cited as precedence [sic] without first verifying the validity of the conclusions by independent research"). Their views may reflect overly cautious legal advice based on division in the lower courts. Or they may reflect legal error. Either way, we have never held that the Government's reading of a criminal statute is entitled to any deference. See Crandon v. United States, 494 U.S. 152, 177, 110 S.Ct. 997, 108 L.Ed.2d 132 (1990) (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment).
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice SOTOMAYOR joins, concurring.
Justice SCALIA objects to our decision to consider whether the statute is content based and thus subject to strict scrutiny, given that we ultimately conclude that it is not narrowly tailored. Post, at 2541 (opinion concurring in judgment). But we think it unexceptional to perform the first part of a multipart constitutional analysis first. The content-neutrality prong of the Ward test is logically antecedent to the narrow-tailoring prong, because it determines the appropriate level of scrutiny. It is not unusual for the Court to proceed sequentially in applying a constitutional test, even when the preliminary steps turn out not to be dispositive. See, e.g.,Bartnicki v. Vopper, 532 U.S. 514, 526-527, 121 S.Ct. 1753, 149 L.Ed.2d 787 (2001); Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project, 561 U.S. 1, 25-28, 130 S.Ct. 2705, 177 L.Ed.2d 355 (2010) (concluding that a law was content based even though it ultimately survived strict scrutiny).
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice KENNEDY and Justice THOMAS join, concurring in the judgment.
Justice ALITO, concurring in the judgment.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, dissenting.
Today the Court addresses only one of these legal protections: the PDA's prohibition of disparate treatment. For the reasons well stated in Justice SCALIA's dissenting opinion, the Court interprets the PDA in a manner that risks "conflation of disparate impact with disparate treatment" by permitting a plaintiff to use a policy's disproportionate burden on pregnant employees as evidence of pretext.Ante,at 1364 - 1365; see ante, at 1354 - 1355 (opinion of the Court). In so doing, the Court injects unnecessary confusion into the accepted burden-shifting framework established in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green,411 U.S. 792, 93 S.Ct. 1817, 36 L.Ed.2d 668 (1973).
Our interpretation of the Act is also, unlike the dissent's, consistent with Congress' intent to overrule Gilbert's reasoning and result. The dissent says that "[i]f a pregnant woman is denied an accommodation under a policy that does not discriminate against pregnancy, she hasbeen 'treated the same' as everyone else."Post,at 1362. This logic would have found no problem with the employer plan in Gilbert,which "denied an accommodation" to pregnant women on the same basis as it denied accommodations to other employees-i.e.,it accommodated only sicknesses and accidents, and pregnancy was neither of those. See Part II-C, supra. In arguing to the contrary, the dissent's discussion of Gilbertrelies exclusively on the opinions of the dissenting Justices in that case. See post,at 1363 - 1364. But Congress' intent in passing the Act was to overrule the Gilbert majorityopinion, which viewed the employer's disability plan as denying coverage to pregnant employees on a neutral basis.
Justice ALITO, concurring in the judgment.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice KENNEDYand Justice THOMASjoin, dissenting.
Justice ALITO's concurrence agrees with the Court's rejection of both conceivable readings of the same-treatment clause, but fashions a different compromise between them. Under its approach, an employer may deny a pregnant woman a benefit granted to workers who perform similar tasks only on the basis of a "neutral business ground." Ante,at 1361 (opinion concurring in judgment). This requirement of a "business ground" shadows the Court's requirement of a "sufficiently strong" justification, and, like it, has no footing in the terms of the same-treatment clause. As the concurrence understands the words "shall be treated the same," an employer must give pregnant workers the same accommodations (not merely accommodations on the same terms) as other workers "who are similar in their ability or inability to work." Ante,at 1357 - 1358. But the concurrence realizes that requiring the same accommodations to all who are similar in ability or inability to work-the only characteristic mentioned in the same-treatment clause-would "lead to wildly implausible results." Ante,at 1358, n. 3. To solve this problem, the concurrence broadens the category of characteristics that the employer may take into account. It allows an employer to find dissimilarity on the basis of traits otherthan ability to work so long as there is a "neutral business reason" for considering them-though it immediately adds that cost and inconvenience are not good enough reasons. Ante,at 1359. The need to engage in this text-free broadening in order to make the concurrence's interpretation work is as good a sign as any that its interpretation is wrong from the start.
Justice SCALIA, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and Justice THOMAS join, and with whom Justice ALITO joins as to Parts I, II, and III, dissenting.
Before AEDPA, the Supreme Court had developed an array of doctrines, see, e.g., Wainwright v. Sykes, 433 U.S. 72, 87, 97 S.Ct. 2497, 53 L.Ed.2d 594 (1977) (procedural default); McCleskey v. Zant, 499 U.S. 467, 489, 111 S.Ct. 1454, 113 L.Ed.2d 517 (1991) (abuse of the writ), to limit the habeas practice that it had radically expanded in the early or mid-20th century to include review of the merits of conviction and not merely jurisdiction of the convicting court, see Stone v. Powell, 428 U.S. 465, 475-478, 96 S.Ct. 3037, 49 L.Ed.2d 1067 (1976) (citing Frank v. Mangum, 237 U.S. 309, 35 S.Ct. 582, 59 L.Ed. 969 (1915) ); Brown v. Allen, 344 U.S. 443, 533-534, 73 S.Ct. 397, 97 L.Ed. 469 (1953) (Jackson, J., concurring in result); Bator, Finality in Criminal Law and Federal Habeas Corpus for State Prisoners, 76 Harv. L.Rev. 441, 483-499 (1963). For example, the doctrine of procedural default holds that a state prisoner's default of his federal claims "in state court pursuant to an independent and adequate state procedural rule" bars federal habeas review of those claims. Coleman v. Thompson , 501 U.S. 722, 750, 111 S.Ct. 2546, 115 L.Ed.2d 640 (1991). That doctrine is not a statutory or jurisdictional command; rather, it is a "prudential" rule "grounded in 'considerations of comity and concerns for the orderly administration of criminal justice.' " Dretke v. Haley, 541 U.S. 386, 392-393, 124 S.Ct. 1847, 158 L.Ed.2d 659 (2004) (quoting Francis v. Henderson, 425 U.S. 536, 538-539, 96 S.Ct. 1708, 48 L.Ed.2d 149 (1976) ).
The opinion for the Court also trots out post-AEDPA cases to prove the irrelevant point that "[t]he miscarriage of justice exception ... survived AEDPA's passage." Ante, at 1930 - 1931. What it ignores, yet again, is that after AEDPA's passage, as before, the exception applied only to nonstatutory obstacles to relief. Bousley v. United States and House v. Bell were applications of the judge-made doctrine of procedural default. See Bousley, 523 U.S. 614, 623, 118 S.Ct. 1604, 140 L.Ed.2d 828 (1998) ; id., at 625, 118 S.Ct. 1604 (Stevens, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) ("I agree with the Court's central holding ... that none of its judge-made rules foreclose petitioner's collateral attack ..." (emphasis added)); id., at 630, 118 S.Ct. 1604 (SCALIA, J., dissenting);
"It would be marvellously inspiring to be able to boast that we have a criminal-justice system in which a claim of 'actual innocence' will always be heard, no matter how late it is brought forward, and no matter how much the failure to bring it forward at the proper time is the defendant's own fault." Bousley, 523 U.S., at 635, 118 S.Ct. 1604 (SCALIA, J., dissenting). I suspect it is this vision of perfect justice through abundant procedure that impels the Court today. Of course, "we do not have such a system, and no society unwilling to devote unlimited resources to repetitive criminal litigation ever could." Ibid. Until today, a district court could dismiss an untimely petition without delving into the underlying facts. From now on, each time an untimely petitioner claims innocence-and how many prisoners asking to be let out of jail do not?-the district court will be obligated to expend limited judicial resources wading into the murky merits of the petitioner's innocence claim. The Court notes "that tenable actual-innocence gateway pleas are rare." Ante, at 1928. That discouraging reality, intended as reassurance, is in truth "the condemnation of the procedure which has encouraged frivolous cases." Brown, 344 U.S., at 537, 73 S.Ct. 397 (Jackson, J., concurring in result).
Justice SCALIA, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice THOMAS, and Justice ALITO join, concurring in the judgment.
Second and relatedly, when questions involving the Constitution's government-structuring provisions are presented in a justiciable case, it is the solemn responsibility of the Judicial Branch " 'to say what the law is.' " Zivotofsky v. Clinton, 566 U.S. ----, ----, 132 S.Ct. 1421, 1428, 182 L.Ed.2d 423 (2012) (quoting Marbury v. Madison, 1 Cranch 137, 177, 2 L.Ed. 60 (1803)). This Court does not defer to the other branches' resolution of such controversies; as Justice KENNEDY has previously written, our role is in no way "lessened" because it might be said that "the two political branches are adjusting their own powers between themselves." Clinton,supra, at 449, 118 S.Ct. 2091 (concurring opinion). Since the separation of powers exists for the protection of individual liberty, its vitality "does not depend" on "whether 'the encroached-upon branch approves the encroachment.' " Free Enterprise Fund, supra, at 497, 130 S.Ct. 3138 (quoting New York v. United States, 505 U.S. 144, 182, 112 S.Ct. 2408, 120 L.Ed.2d 120 (1992)); see also Freytag v. Commissioner, 501 U.S. 868, 879-880, 111 S.Ct. 2631, 115 L.Ed.2d 764 (1991); Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority v. Citizens for Abatement of Aircraft Noise, Inc., 501 U.S. 252, 276-277, 111 S.Ct. 2298, 115 L.Ed.2d 236 (1991). Rather, policing the "enduring structure" of constitutional government when the political branches fail to do so is "one of the most vital functions of this Court." Public Citizen v. Department of Justice, 491 U.S. 440, 468, 109 S.Ct. 2558, 105 L.Ed.2d 377 (1989) (KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment).
Justice BREYER, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, and Justice KENNEDY join, dissenting.
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, concurring.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, concurring in part.
Consent is especially salient in the context of a bilateral investment treaty, where the treaty is not an already agreed-upon arbitration provision between known parties, but rather a nation state's standing offer to arbitrate with an amorphous class of private investors. In this setting, a nation-state might reasonably wish to condition its consent to arbitrate with a previously unspecified investor counterparty on the investor's compliance with a requirement that might be deemed "purely procedural" in the ordinary commercial context, ante, at 1207 - 1208. Moreover, as THE CHIEF JUSTICE notes, "[i]t is no trifling matter" for a sovereign nation to "subject itself to international arbitration" proceedings, so we should "not presume that any country ... takes that step lightly." Post, at 1219 (dissenting opinion).
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice KENNEDY joins, dissenting.
Justice SOTOMAYOR contends that "Argentina's conduct confirms that the local litigation requirement is not a condition on consent, for rather than objecting to arbitration on the ground that there was no binding arbitration agreement to begin with, Argentina actively participated in the constitution of the arbitral panel and in the proceedings that followed." Ante, at 1214 (opinion concurring in part). But as the arbitral tribunal itself recognized, Argentina did object to the tribunal's jurisdiction to hear the dispute. App. to Pet. for Cert. 99a, 134a, 143a, 161a-163a. And we have held that "merely arguing the arbitrability issue to an arbitrator"-say, by "filing with the arbitrators a written memorandum objecting to the arbitrators' jurisdiction"-"does not indicate a clear willingness to arbitrate that issue, i.e., a willingness to be effectively bound by the arbitrator's decision on that point." First Options of Chicago, Inc. v. Kaplan, 514 U.S. 938, 946, 115 S.Ct. 1920, 131 L.Ed.2d 985 (1995). The concurrence contends that Argentina "apparently" argued its jurisdictional objection in terms of procedure rather than consent, ante, at 1205, n., but the one piece of evidence cited-a negative inference from the arbitrator's characterization of Argentina's argument on a subsidiary issue-hardly suffices to distinguish First Options.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice KAGAN joins, dissenting.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins, dissenting.
Justice BREYER argues that it is not "literally impossible" for Mutual to comply with both state and federal law because it could escape liability "either by not doing business in the relevant State or by paying the state penalty, say damages, for failing to comply with, as here, a state-law tort standard." Post, at 2481 (dissenting opinion). But, as discussed below, infra, at 2477 - 2478 -leaving aside the rare case in which state or federal law actually requires a product to be pulled from the market-our pre-emption cases presume that a manufacturer's ability to stop selling does not turn impossibility into possibility. See, e.g., Florida Lime & Avocado Growers, Inc. v. Paul, 373 U.S. 132, 143, 83 S.Ct. 1210, 10 L.Ed.2d 248 (1963) (There would be "impossibility of dual compliance" where "federal orders forbade the picking and marketing of any avocado testing more than 7% oil, while the California test excluded from the State any avocado measuring less than 8% oil content"). And, of course, PLIVA, Inc. v. Mensing, 564 U.S. ----, 131 S.Ct. 2567, 180 L.Ed.2d 580 (2011), forecloses any argument that impossibility is defeated by the prospect that a manufacturer could "pa[y] the state penalty" for violating a state-law duty; that prospect would have defeated impossibility in PLIVA as well. See id ., at ----, 131 S.Ct., at 2578 ("[I]t was impossible for the Manufacturers to comply with both their state-law duty to change the label and their federal law duty to keep the label the same"). To hold otherwise would render impossibility pre-emption "all but meaningless." Id ., at ----, 131 S.Ct., at 2579.
Justice KENNEDY, with whom Justice THOMAS, Justice ALITO, and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.
Justice SCALIA, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice THOMAS, and Justice ALITO join, dissenting.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice SCALIA, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice THOMAS and Justice KAGAN join, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice KENNEDY and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, concurring in the judgment.
Justice SCALIA, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice GINSBURG, concurring in the judgment.
Thus, the Court in Line Material explained that "the improper use of [a patent] monopoly," is "invalid" under the antitrust laws and resolved the antitrust question in that case by seeking an accommodation "between the lawful restraint on trade of the patent monopoly and the illegal restraint prohibited broadly by the Sherman Act." 333 U.S., at 310, 68 S.Ct. 550. To strike that balance, the Court asked questions such as whether "the patent statute specifically gives a right" to restrain competition in the manner challenged; and whether "competition is impeded to a greater degree" by the restraint at issue than other restraints previously approved as reasonable. Id., at 311, 68 S.Ct. 550. See also United States v. United States Gypsum Co., 333 U.S. 364, 390-391, 68 S.Ct. 525, 92 L.Ed. 746 (1948) (courts must "balance the privileges of [the patent holder] and its licensees under the patent grants with the prohibitions of the Sherman Act against combinations and attempts to monopolize"); Walker Process Equipment, Inc. v. Food Machinery & Chemical Corp., 382 U.S. 172, 174, 86 S.Ct. 347, 15 L.Ed.2d 247 (1965) ("[E]nforcement of a patent procured by fraud" may violate the Sherman Act). In short, rather than measure the length or amount of a restriction solely against the length of the patent's term or its earning potential, as the Court of Appeals apparently did here, this Court answered the antitrust question by considering traditional antitrust factors such as likely anticompetitive effects, redeeming virtues, market power, and potentially offsetting legal considerations present in the circumstances, such as here those related to patents. See Part II-B, infra . Whether a particular restraint lies "beyond the limits of the patent monopoly" is a conclusion that flows from that analysis and not, as THE CHIEF JUSTICE suggests, its starting point. Post, at 2239, 2241 - 2242 (dissenting opinion).
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice SCALIA and Justice THOMAS join, dissenting.
To begin, the majority's description of Singer is inaccurate. In Singer, several patent holders with competing claims entered into a settlement agreement in which they cross-licensed their patents to each other, and did so in order to disadvantage Japanese competition. See 374 U.S., at 194-195, 83 S.Ct. 1773 (finding that the agreement had "a common purpose to suppress the Japanese machine competition in the United States" (footnote omitted)). According to the majority, the Court in Singer "did not examine whether, on the assumption that all three patents were valid, patent law would have allowed the patents' holders to do the same." Ante, at 2232. Rather, the majority contends, Singer held that this agreement violated the anti-trust laws because "in important part ... 'the public interest in granting patent monopolies' exists only to the extent that 'the public is given a novel and useful invention' in 'consideration for its grant.' " Ibid. (quoting Singer, 374 U.S., at 199, 83 S.Ct. 1773 (White, J., concurring)). But the majority in Singer certainly did ask whether patent law permitted such an arrangement, concluding that it did not. See id. , at 196-197, 83 S.Ct. 1773 (reiterating that it "is equally well settled that the possession of a valid patent or patents does not give the patentee any exemption from the provisions of the Sherman Act beyond the limits of the patent monopoly " and holding that "those limitations have been exceeded in this case" (emphasis added; internal quotation marks omitted )); see also Hovenkamp § 7.2b, at 7-8, n. 15 (citing Singer as a quintessential case in which patent holders were subject to antitrust liability because their settlement agreement went beyond the scope of their patents and thus conferred monopoly power beyond what the patent lawfully authorized). Even Justice White's concurrence, on which the majority relies, emphasized that the conduct at issue in Singer -collusion between patent holders to exclude Japanese competition and to prevent disclosure of prior art-was not authorized by the patent laws. 374 U.S., at 197, 200, 83 S.Ct. 1773.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE wrongly asserts that the differences between the Wetterling Act and SORNA are "insignificant." Ante, at 2506 (opinion concurring in judgment). SORNA increases the federal penalty for failing to register from a misdemeanor punishable by no more than one year to a felony punishable by up to 10 years for a first offense. Compare 18 U.S.C. § 2250(a) with 42 U.S.C. § 14072(i) (2000 ed.). It is simply incorrect to minimize that change by saying that Kebodeaux received only a day more than he could have received for failing to register under the Wetterling Act. Ante, at 2506 (ROBERTS, C.J., concurring in judgment). The "legally prescribed range is the penalty affixed to the crime," Alleyne v. United States, --- U.S. ----, ----, 133 S.Ct. 2151, ----, 186 L.Ed.2d 314 (2013) and SORNA increased that range significantly. SORNA also requires that a sex offender who moves update his registration within three days of moving, instead of seven. Compare 42 U.S.C. § 16913(c) with App. to Pet. for Cert. 167a-168a. Thus, a person can be convicted under SORNA for conduct that would have complied with the Wetterling Act.
Justice ALITO contends that, by trying members of the military in a military court, Congress exacerbated "the possibility that a convicted sex offender may escape [the state] registration [system]," and that SORNA is necessary and proper to correct this problem. Ante, at 2509 (opinion concurring in judgment). But Justice ALITO has not identified any enumerated power that gives Congress authority to address this supposed problem, and there is no evidence that such a problem exists. Indeed, Texas has indicated that SORNA undermines its registration system, rather than making it more effective. See Letter from Jeffrey S. Boyd, General Counsel and Acting Chief of Staff, Texas Office of the Governor, to Linda Baldwin, Director, SMART Office 1 (Aug. 17, 2011) ("Although we in Texas certainly appreciate and agree with the stated goals of SORNA, the adoption of this 'one-size-fits-all' federal legislation in Texas would in fact undermine the accomplishment of those objectives in Texas, just as it would in most other states"), online at http://www.ncleg. net/documentsites/committees/JLOCJPS/October% 2013,% 202011% 20Meeting/RD_ SORNA_General_Information_2011-10-13.pdf (as visited June 21, 2013, and available in Clerk of Court's case file).
Chief Justice ROBERTS, concurring in the judgment.
Justice ALITO, concurring in the judgment.
I concur in the judgment solely on the ground that the registration requirement at issue is necessary and proper to execute Congress' power "[t]o make Rules for the Government and Regulation of the land and naval Forces." U.S. Const., Art. I, § 8, cl. 14. Exercising this power, Congress has enacted provisions of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ) that authorize members of the military to be tried before a military tribunal, rather than a state court, for ordinary criminal offenses, including sex crimes, that are committed both within and outside the boundaries of a military installation. See, e.g., UCMJ Art. 2 (persons subject to UCMJ); Art. 5 ("This chapter applies in all places"); Art. 120 (rape by a person subject to UCMJ); Solorio v. United States, 483 U.S. 435, 436-438, 107 S.Ct. 2924, 97 L.Ed.2d 364 (1987) (servicemember may be court-martialed for off-base crime without "service connection"). States usually have concurrent jurisdiction over such crimes when they are committed off base and sometimes possess jurisdiction over such offenses when committed on base. These offenses, however, are rarely prosecuted in both a military and a state court, and therefore when a servicemember is court-martialed for a sex offense over which the State had jurisdiction, this is usually because the State has deferred to the military. Where the offense in question is a sex crime, a consequence of this handling of the case is that the offender, if convicted, may fall through the cracks of a state registration system. For example, if the servicemember is convicted of a sex offense in a state court, the state court may be required by state law to provide that information to the state registry. See, e.g., Colo.Rev.Stat. Ann. § 16-22-104(1)(a)(I) (2012). State law may also require the state corrections department to notify both state and local police of the offender's release. See, e.g., § 16-22-107(3). Provisions such as these are designed to prevent sex offenders from avoiding registration, as many have in the past. See H.R.Rep. No. 109-218, pt. 1, p. 26 (2005) (despite pre-SORNA registration efforts, "[t]he most significant enforcement issue in the sex offender program [was] that over 100,000 sex offenders, or nearly one-fifth in the Nation are 'missing,' meaning that they have not complied with sex offender registration requirements"). When a servicemember is convicted by a military tribunal, however, the State has no authority to require that tribunal to notify the state registry, nor does it have the authority to require the officials at a military prison to notify state or local police when the servicemember is released from custody. Because the exercise of military jurisdiction may have this effect-in other words, may create a gap in the laws intended to maximize the registration of sex offenders-it is necessary and proper for Congress to require the registration of members of the military who are convicted of a qualifying sex offense in a military court. When Congress, in validly exercising a power expressly conferred by the Constitution, creates or exacerbates a dangerous situation (here, the possibility that a convicted sex offender may escape registration), Congress has the power to try to eliminate or at least diminish that danger. See United States v. Comstock, 560 U.S. 126, 155-158, 130 S.Ct. 1949, 176 L.Ed.2d 878 (2010) (ALITO, J., concurring in judgment). I accordingly concur in the judgment only.
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice BREYER and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.
Under the status-based discrimination provision, it is an "unlawful employment practice" for an employer "to discriminate against any individual ... because of such individual's race, color, religion, sex, or national origin." § 2000e-2(a). In its 1989 decision in Price Waterhouse, the Court sought to explain the causation standard imposed by this language. It addressed in particular what it means for an action to be taken "because of" an individual's race, religion, or nationality. Although no opinion in that case commanded a majority, six Justices did agree that a plaintiff could prevail on a claim of status-based discrimination if he or she could show that one of the prohibited traits was a "motivating" or "substantial" factor in the employer's decision. 490 U.S., at 258, 109 S.Ct. 1775 (plurality opinion); id., at 259, 109 S.Ct. 1775 (White, J., concurring in judgment); id., at 276, 109 S.Ct. 1775 (O'Connor, J., concurring in judgment). If the plaintiff made that showing, the burden of persuasion would shift to the employer, which could escape liability if it could prove that it would have taken the same employment action in the absence of all discriminatory animus. Id., at 258, 109 S.Ct. 1775 (plurality opinion); id., at 259-260, 109 S.Ct. 1775 (opinion of White, J.); id., at 276-277, 109 S.Ct. 1775 (opinion of O'Connor, J.). In other words, the employer had to show that a discriminatory motive was not the but-for cause of the adverse employment action.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice BREYER, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Today's opinion rehashes arguments rightly rejected in Price Waterhouse. Concurring in the judgment in that case, Justice O'Connor recognized the disconnect between the standard the dissent advocated, which would have imposed on the plaintiff the burden of showing but-for causation, see 490 U.S., at 282, 286-287, 109 S.Ct. 1775 (KENNEDY, J., dissenting), and the common-law doctrines on which the dissent relied. As Justice O'Connor explained:
Justices White and O'Connor separately concurred and would have required the Title VII plaintiff to show that protected characteristics constituted a substantial motivating factor in the adverse employment decision. See Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins, 490 U.S. 228, 259, 109 S.Ct. 1775, 104 L.Ed.2d 268 (1989) (White, J., concurring in judgment); id., at 265, 109 S.Ct. 1775 (O'Connor, J., concurring in judgment).
Two of the dissenting opinions implicitly address this asymmetry. The principal dissent reasons that States and Tribes should be treated differently for purposes of sovereign immunity because—unlike tribal sovereign immunity—state sovereign immunity has constitutional origins. Post, at 2047, n. 1. Justice GINSBURG offers another view, that Tribes and States should both receive less immunity. She expresses concerns about cases like Seminole Tribe, pointing to dissents that have catalogued the many problems associated with the Court’s sprawling state sovereign immunity jurisprudence. Post, at 2055-2056 (citing, among others, Alden v. Maine, 527 U.S. 706, 814, 119 S.Ct. 2240, 144 L.Ed.2d 636 (1999) (Souter, J., dissenting)).
Justice THOMAS, with whom the CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice SCALIA, and Justice ALITO join as to Parts I and II-C, dissenting.
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice SCALIA joins, dissenting.
The dissent trots out the old saw, derived from dictum in a footnote, that legislation motivated by " 'prejudice against discrete and insular minorities' " merits " 'more exacting judicial scrutiny.' " Post, at 1668 (quoting United States v. Carolene Products, 304 U.S. 144, 152-153, n. 4, 58 S.Ct. 778, 82 L.Ed. 1234). I say derived from that dictum (expressed by the four-Justice majority of a seven-Justice Court) because the dictum itself merely said " [n]or need we enquire ... whether prejudice against discrete and insular minorities may be a special condition," id., at 153, n. 4, 58 S.Ct. 778 (emphasis added). The dissent does not argue, of course, that such "prejudice" produced § 26. Nor does it explain why certain racial minorities in Michigan qualify as " 'insular,' " meaning that "other groups will not form coalitions with them-and, critically, not because of lack of common interests but because of 'prejudice.' " Strauss, Is Carolene Products Obsolete? 2010 U. Ill. L.Rev. 1251, 1257. Nor does it even make the case that a group's "discreteness" and "insularity" are political liabilities rather than political strengths8-a serious question that alone demonstrates the prudence of the Carolene Products dictumizers in leaving the "enquir[y]" for another day. As for the question whether "legislation which restricts those political processes which can ordinarily be expected to bring about repeal of undesirable legislation ... is to be subjected to more exacting judicial scrutiny," the Carolene Products Court found it "unnecessary to consider [that] now." 304 U.S., at 152, n. 4, 58 S.Ct. 778. If the dissent thinks that worth considering today, it should explain why the election of a university's governing board is a "political process which can ordinarily be expected to bring about repeal of undesirable legislation," but Michigan voters' ability to amend their Constitution is not. It seems to me quite the opposite. Amending the Constitution requires the approval of only "a majority of the electors voting on the question." Mich. Const., Art. XII, § 2. By contrast, voting in a favorable board (each of which has eight members) at the three major public universities requires electing by majority vote at least 15 different candidates, several of whom would be running during different election cycles. See BAMN v. Regents of Univ. of Mich., 701 F.3d 466, 508 (C.A.6 2012) (Sutton, J., dissenting). So if Michigan voters, instead of amending their Constitution, had pursued the dissent's preferred path of electing board members promising to "abolish race-sensitive admissions policies," post, at 1653, it would have been harder, not easier, for racial minorities favoring affirmative action to overturn that decision. But the more important point is that we should not design our jurisprudence to conform to dictum in a footnote in a four-Justice opinion.
As Justice Harlan observed over a century ago, "[o]ur Constitution is color-blind, and neither knows nor tolerates classes among citizens." Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U.S. 537, 559, 16 S.Ct. 1138, 41 L.Ed. 256 (1896) (dissenting opinion). The people of Michigan wish the same for their governing charter. It would be shameful for us to stand in their way.11
Justice BREYER, concurring in the judgment.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins, dissenting.
And what now of the political-process doctrine? After the plurality's revision of Hunter and Seattle, it is unclear what is left. The plurality certainly does not tell us. On this point, and this point only, I agree with Justice SCALIA that the plurality has rewritten those precedents beyond recognition. See ante, at 1641 - 1643 (opinion concurring in judgment).
Justice BREYER concludes that Hunter and Seattle do not apply. Section 26, he reasons, did not move the relevant decisionmaking authority from one political level to another; rather, it removed that authority from "unelected actors and placed it in the hands of the voters." Ante, at 1650 (opinion concurring in judgment). He bases this conclusion on the premise that Michigan's elected boards "delegated admissions-related decisionmaking authority to unelected university faculty members and administrators." Ibid. But this premise is simply incorrect.
My colleagues would stop at the second. The plurality embraces the freedom of "self-government" without limits. See ante, at 1645 - 1646. And Justice SCALIA values a "near-limitless" notion of state sovereignty. See ante, at 1645 - 1646 (opinion concurring in judgment). The wrong sought to be corrected by the political-process doctrine, they say, is not one that should concern us and is in any event beyond the reach of the Fourteenth Amendment. As they see it, the Court's role in protecting the political process ends once we have removed certain barriers to the minority's participation in that process. Then, they say, we must sit back and let the majority rule without the key constitutional limit recognized in Hunter and Seattle.
Justice SCALIA first argues that the political-process doctrine "misreads the Equal Protection Clause to protect 'particular group[s],' " running counter to a line of cases that treat " 'equal protection as a personal right.' " Ante, at 1644 (opinion concurring in judgment) (quoting Adarand, 515 U.S., at 230, 115 S.Ct. 2097). Equal protection, he says, protects " ' persons, not groups.' " Ante, at 1644 (quoting Adarand, 515 U.S., at 227, 115 S.Ct. 2097). This criticism ignores the obvious: Discrimination against an individual occurs because of that individual's membership in a particular group. Yes, equal protection is a personal right, but there can be no equal protection violation unless the injured individual is a member of a protected group or a class of individuals. It is membership in the group-here the racial minority-that gives rise to an equal protection violation.
Justice SCALIA next invokes state sovereignty, arguing that "we have emphasized the near-limitless sovereignty of each State to design its governing structure as it sees fit." Ante, at 1646 (opinion concurring in judgment). But state sovereignty is not absolute; it is subject to constitutional limits. The Court surely did not offend state sovereignty by barring States from changing their voting procedures to exclude racial minorities. So why does the political-process doctrine offend state sovereignty? The doctrine takes nothing away from state sovereignty that the Equal Protection Clause does not require. All it says is that a State may not reconfigure its existing political processes in a manner that establishes a distinct and more burdensome process for minority members of our society alone to obtain legislation in their interests.
Finally, Justice SCALIA disagrees with "the proposition that a facially neutral law may deny equal protection solely because it has a disparate racial impact." Ante, at 1647 (opinion concurring in judgment). He would acknowledge, however, that an act that draws racial distinctions or makes racial classifications triggers strict scrutiny regardless of whether discriminatory intent is shown. See Adarand, 515 U.S., at 213, 115 S.Ct. 2097. That should settle the matter: Section 26 draws a racial distinction. As the Seattle Court explained, "when the political process or the decisionmaking mechanism used to address racially conscious legislation-and only such legislation-is singled out for peculiar and disadvantageous treatment, the governmental action plainly rests on 'distinctions based on race.' " 458 U.S., at 485, 102 S.Ct. 3187 (some internal quotation marks omitted); see also id., at 470, 102 S.Ct. 3187 (noting that although a State may " 'allocate governmental power on the basis of any general principle,' " it may not use racial considerations "to define the governmental decisionmaking structure").
My colleagues also attack the first prong of the doctrine as "rais[ing] serious constitutional concerns," ante, at 1634 (plurality opinion), and being "unadministrable," ante, at 1642 - 1643 (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment). Justice SCALIA wonders whether judges are equipped to weigh in on what constitutes a "racial issue." See ante, at 1643. The plurality, too, thinks courts would be "with no clear legal standards or accepted sources to guide judicial decision." Ante, at 1635. Yet as Justice SCALIA recognizes, Hunter and Seattle provide a standard: Does the public policy at issue "inur[e] primarily to the benefit of the minority, and [was it] designed for that purpose"? Seattle, 458 U.S., at 472, 102 S.Ct. 3187; see ante, at 1643. Surely this is the kind of factual inquiry that judges are capable of making. Justice SCALIA, for instance, accepts the standard announced in Washington v. Davis, which requires judges to determine whether discrimination is intentional or whether it merely has a discriminatory effect. Such an inquiry is at least as difficult for judges as the one called for by Hunter and Seattle. In any event, it is clear that the constitutional amendment in this case has a racial focus; it is facially race-based and, by operation of law, disadvantages only minorities. See supra, at 1659 - 1660.
Justice SCALIA and Justice SOTOMAYOR question the relationship between Washington v. Seattle School Dist. No. 1, 458 U.S. 457, 102 S.Ct. 3187, 73 L.Ed.2d 896 (1982), and Parents Involved in Community Schools v. Seattle School Dist. No. 1, 551 U.S. 701, 127 S.Ct. 2738, 168 L.Ed.2d 508 (2007). See post, at 1642, n. 2 (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment); post, at 1664, n. 9 (SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting). The plurality today addresses that issue, explaining that the race-conscious action in Parents Involved was unconstitutional given the absence of a showing of prior de jure segregation. Parents Involved, supra, at 720-721, 127 S.Ct. 2738 (majority opinion), 736, 127 S.Ct. 2738 (plurality opinion); see ante, at 1633. Today's plurality notes that the Court in Seattle "assumed" the constitutionality of the busing remedy at issue there, " 'even absent a finding of prior de jure segregation.' " Ante, at 1633 (quoting Seattle, supra, at 472, n. 15, 102 S.Ct. 3187). The assumption on which Seattle proceeded did not constitute a finding sufficient to justify the race-conscious action in Parents Involved, though it is doubtless pertinent in analyzing Seattle. "As this Court held in Parents Involved, the [Seattle] school board's purported remedial action would not be permissible today absent a showing of de jure segregation," but "we must understand Seattle as Seattle understood itself." Ante, at 1633 (emphasis added).
Justice SCALIA accuses me of crafting my own version (or versions) of the racial-focus prong. See ante, at 1643, n. 4 (opinion concurring in judgment). I do not. I simply apply the test announced in Seattle : whether the policy in question "inures primarily to the benefit of the minority." 458 U.S., at 472, 102 S.Ct. 3187. Justice SCALIA ignores this analysis, see Part II-B-1, supra, and instead purports to identify three versions of the test that he thinks my opinion advances. The first-whether " 'the policy in question benefits only a racial minority,' " ante, at 1643, n. 4 (quoting supra, at 1641 - 1642)-misunderstands the doctrine and misquotes my opinion. The racial-focus prong has never required a policy to benefit only a minority group. The sentence from which Justice SCALIA appears to quote makes the altogether different point that the political-process doctrine is obviously not implicated in the first place by a restructuring that burdens members of society equally. This is the second prong of the political-process doctrine. See supra, at 1641 - 1642 (explaining that the political-process doctrine is implicated "[w]hen the majority reconfigures the political process in a manner that burdens only a racial minority"). The second version-which asks whether a policy "benefits primarily a racial minority," ante, at 1643, n. 4-is the one articulated by the Seattle Court and, as I have explained, see supra, at 1647 and this page, it is easily met in this case. And the third-whether the policy has "the incidental effect" of benefitting racial minorities," ante, at 1643, n. 4-is not a test I advance at all.
In the face of this overwhelming evidence, Justice SCALIA claims that it is actually easier, not harder, for minorities to effectuate change at the constitutional amendment level than at the board level. See ante, at 1644 - 1645 (opinion concurring in judgment) ("voting in a favorable board (each of which has eight members) at the three major public universities requires electing by majority vote at least 15 different candidates, several of whom would be running during different election cycles"). This claim minimizes just how difficult it is to amend the State Constitution. See supra, at 1660 - 1662. It is also incorrect in its premise that minorities must elect an entirely new slate of board members in order to effectuate change at the board level. Justice SCALIA overlooks the fact that minorities need not elect any new board members in order to effect change; they may instead seek to persuade existing board members to adopt changes in their interests.
I do not take the position, as Justice SCALIA asserts, that the process of amending the Michigan Constitution is not a part of Michigan's existing political process. See ante, at 1645 - 1647 (opinion concurring in judgment). It clearly is. The problem with § 26 is not that "amending Michigan's Constitution is simply not a part of that State's 'existing political process.' " Ante, at 1632 - 1633. It is that § 26 reconfigured the political process in Michigan such that it is now more difficult for racial minorities, and racial minorities alone, to achieve legislation in their interest. Section 26 elevated the issue of race-sensitive admissions policies, and not any other kinds of admissions policies, to a higher plane of the existing political process in Michigan: that of a constitutional amendment.
The contention that legislative prayer must be generic or nonsectarian derives from dictum in County of Allegheny, 492 U.S. 573, 109 S.Ct. 3086, that was disputed when written and has been repudiated by later cases. There the Court held that a crèche placed on the steps of a county courthouse to celebrate the Christmas season violated the Establishment Clause because it had "the effect of endorsing a patently Christian message." Id., at 601, 109 S.Ct. 3086. Four dissenting Justices disputed that endorsement could be the proper test, as it likely would condemn a host of traditional practices that recognize the role religion plays in our society, among them legislative prayer and the "forthrightly religious" Thanksgiving proclamations issued by nearly every President since Washington. Id., at 670-671, 109 S.Ct. 3086. The Court sought to counter this criticism by recasting Marsh to permit only prayer that contained no overtly Christian references:
In their declarations in the trial court, respondents stated that the prayers gave them offense and made them feel excluded and disrespected. Offense, however, does not equate to coercion. Adults often encounter speech they find disagreeable; and an Establishment Clause violation is not made out any time a person experiences a sense of affront from the expression of contrary religious views in a legislative forum, especially where, as here, any member of the public is welcome in turn to offer an invocation reflecting his or her own convictions. See Elk Grove Unified School Dist. v. Newdow, 542 U.S. 1, 44, 124 S.Ct. 2301, 159 L.Ed.2d 98 (2004) (O'Connor, J., concurring) ("The compulsion of which Justice Jackson was concerned ... was of the direct sort-the Constitution does not guarantee citizens a right entirely to avoid ideas with which they disagree"). If circumstances arise in which the pattern and practice of ceremonial, legislative prayer is alleged to be a means to coerce or intimidate others, the objection can be addressed in the regular course. But the showing has not been made here, where the prayers neither chastised dissenters nor attempted lengthy disquisition on religious dogma. Courts remain free to review the pattern of prayers over time to determine whether they comport with the tradition of solemn, respectful prayer approved in Marsh, or whether coercion is a real and substantial likelihood. But in the general course legislative bodies do not engage in impermissible coercion merely by exposing constituents to prayer they would rather not hear and in which they need not participate. See County of Allegheny, 492 U.S., at 670, 109 S.Ct. 3086 (KENNEDY, J., concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part).
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice SCALIA joins, concurring.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice SCALIA joins as to Part II, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
As both the Court and Justice KAGAN point out, we are a Nation of many religions. Ante, at 1820 - 1821; post, at 1841 - 1842, 1850 - 1851. And the Constitution's Religion Clauses seek to "protec[t] the Nation's social fabric from religious conflict." Zelman v. Simmons-Harris, 536 U.S. 639, 717, 122 S.Ct. 2460, 153 L.Ed.2d 604 (2002) (BREYER, J., dissenting). The question in this case is whether the prayer practice of the town of Greece, by doing too little to reflect the religious diversity of its citizens, did too much, even if unintentionally, to promote the "political division along religious lines" that "was one of the principal evils against which the First Amendment was intended to protect." Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S. 602, 622, 91 S.Ct. 2105, 29 L.Ed.2d 745 (1971).
In seeking an answer to that fact-sensitive question, "I see no test-related substitute for the exercise of legal judgment." Van Orden v. Perry, 545 U.S. 677, 700, 125 S.Ct. 2854, 162 L.Ed.2d 607 (2005) (BREYER, J., concurring in judgment). Having applied my legal judgment to the relevant facts, I conclude, like Justice KAGAN, that the town of Greece failed to make reasonable efforts to include prayer givers of minority faiths, with the result that, although it is a community of several faiths, its prayer givers were almost exclusively persons of a single faith. Under these circumstances, I would affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeals that Greece's prayer practice violated the Establishment Clause.
Justice KAGAN, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice BREYER, and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.
One glaring problem is that the government in all these hypotheticals has aligned itself with, and placed its imprimatur on, a particular religious creed. "The clearest command of the Establishment Clause," this Court has held, "is that one religious denomination cannot be officially preferred over another." Larson v. Valente, 456 U.S. 228, 244, 102 S.Ct. 1673, 72 L.Ed.2d 33 (1982). Justices have often differed about a further issue: whether and how the Clause applies to governmental policies favoring religion (of all kinds) over non-religion. Compare, e.g.,McCreary County v. American Civil Liberties Union of Ky., 545 U.S. 844, 860, 125 S.Ct. 2722, 162 L.Ed.2d 729 (2005) ("[T]he First Amendment mandates governmental neutrality between ... religion and nonreligion"), with, e.g.,id., at 885, 125 S.Ct. 2722 (SCALIA, J., dissenting) ("[T]he Court's oft repeated assertion that the government cannot favor religious practice [generally] is false"). But no one has disagreed with this much:
). As several Justices later noted (and the majority today agrees, see ante, at 1825 - 1826), 3Marsh involved "government officials invok[ing] spiritual inspiration entirely for their own benefit without directing any religious message at the citizens they lead." Lee, 505 U.S., at 630, n. 8, 112 S.Ct. 2649 (Souter, J., concurring).
And contrary to the majority's (and Justice ALITO's) view, see ante, at 1822 - 1823; ante, at 1817 - 1819, that is not difficult to do. If the Town Board had let its chaplains know that they should speak in nonsectarian terms, common to diverse religious groups, then no one would have valid grounds for complaint. See Joyner v. Forsyth County, 653 F.3d 341, 347 (C.A.4 2011) (Wilkinson, J.) (Such prayers show that "those of different creeds are in the end kindred spirits, united by a respect paid higher providence and by a belief in the importance of religious faith"). Priests and ministers, rabbis and imams give such invocations all the time; there is no great mystery to the project. (And providing that guidance would hardly have caused the Board to run afoul of the idea that "[t]he First Amendment is not a majority rule," as the Court (headspinningly) suggests, ante, at 1822; what does that is the Board's refusal to reach out to members of minority religious groups.) Or if the Board preferred, it might have invited clergy of many faiths to serve as chaplains, as the majority notes that Congress does. See ante, at 1820 - 1821. When one month a clergy member refers to Jesus, and the next to Allah or Jehovah-as the majority hopefully though counterfactually suggests happened here, see ante, at 1820 - 1821, 1823-the government does not identify itself with one religion or align itself with that faith's citizens, and the effect of even sectarian prayer is transformed. So Greece had multiple ways of incorporating prayer into its town meetings-reflecting all the ways that prayer (as most of us know from daily life) can forge common bonds, rather than divide. See also ante, at 1840 (BREYER, J., dissenting).
Justice ALITO similarly falters in attempting to excuse the Town Board's constant sectarianism. His concurring opinion takes great pains to show that the problem arose from a sort of bureaucratic glitch: The Town's clerks, he writes, merely "did a bad job in compiling the list" of chaplains. Ante, at 1818; see ante, at 1815 - 1817. Now I suppose one question that account raises is why in over a decade, no member of the Board noticed that the clerk's list was producing prayers of only one kind. But put that aside. Honest oversight or not, the problem remains: Every month for more than a decade, the Board aligned itself, through its prayer practices, with a single religion. That the concurring opinion thinks my objection to that is "really quite niggling," ante, at 1829, says all there is to say about the difference between our respective views.
Justice ALITO makes a compelling case that Arizona's interpretation is superior to respondents'. See post, at 2273 - 2275 (dissenting opinion). At a minimum, however, the interpretations advanced by Arizona and respondents are both plausible. See 677 F.3d, at 439 (Kozinski, C.J., concurring) (weighing the arguments). The competing interpretations of § 1973gg-4(a)(1) raise significant constitutional issues concerning Congress' power to decide who may vote in federal elections. Accordingly, resolution of this case requires a better understanding of the relevant constitutional provisions.
Justice ALITO is correct to point out that the majority's reliance on the EAC is meaningless because the EAC has no members and no current prospects of new members. Post, at 2273 (dissenting opinion). Offering a nonexistent pathway to administrative relief is an exercise in futility, not constitutional avoidance.
Justice KENNEDY, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice SOTOMAYOR joins, concurring in the judgment.
Two months later, a plurality paraphrased and applied the unreasonable-refusal-to-extend concept in Ramdass. See 530 U.S., at 166-170, 120 S.Ct. 2113. It did not, however, grant the habeas petitioner relief on that basis, finding that there was no unreasonable refusal to extend. Moreover, Justice O'Connor, whose vote was necessary to form a majority, cited Williams and made no mention of the unreasonable-refusal-to-extend concept in her separate opinion concurring in the judgment. See 530 U.S., at 178-181, 120 S.Ct. 2113.Ramdass therefore did not alter the interpretation of § 2254(d)(1) set forth in Williams. Aside from one opinion criticizing the unreasonable-refusal-to-extend doctrine, see Yarborough v. Alvarado, 541 U.S. 652, 666, 124 S.Ct. 2140, 158 L.Ed.2d 938 (2004), we have not revisited the issue since Williams and Ramdass. During that same 14-year stretch, however, we have repeatedly restated our "hold[ing]" in Williams, supra, at 409, 120 S.Ct. 1495, that a state-court decision is an unreasonable application of our clearly established precedent if it correctly identifies the governing legal rule but applies that rule unreasonably to the facts of a particular prisoner's case, see, e.g., Cullen v. Pinholster, 563 U.S. ----, ----, 131 S.Ct. 1388, 1399, 179 L.Ed.2d 557 (2011);Rompilla v. Beard, 545 U.S. 374, 380, 125 S.Ct. 2456, 162 L.Ed.2d 360 (2005); Yarborough,supra, at 663, 124 S.Ct. 2140;Penry v. Johnson, 532 U.S. 782, 792, 121 S.Ct. 1910, 150 L.Ed.2d 9 (2001).
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice BREYER and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, concurring.
THE CHIEF JUSTICE's dissent elides the distinction between aggregate and but-for causation. Despite "assum[ing], for purposes of argument," that § 2259 incorporates aggregate causation, the dissent nevertheless applies but-for causation to determine the "full amount" of losses Paroline must pay. See ante, at 1718 - 1719, and n. 2 (arguing that Paroline can only be asked to pay "the full amount of the losses he caused," not losses that he and others combined to cause). My dissenting colleagues cannot have it both ways. Either § 2259 incorporates aggregate causation (in which case the full amount of Amy's losses is all of the losses aggregately caused by Paroline and like offenders), or it requires but-for causation (in which case Amy gets nothing).
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice SCALIA and Justice THOMAS join, dissenting.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins, concurring.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice BREYER joins, and with whom Justice THOMAS joins except as to footnote 3, dissenting.
I do not believe the term "converted" demands the interpretation the plurality gives it, for the reasons advanced in Justice SOTOMAYOR's dissenting opinion.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice BREYER, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice BREYER, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGANjoin, concurring.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice BREYERjoins, concurring.
Justice ALITO, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice SCALIA, concurring in the judgment.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment.
More recently, John R. Sandreaffirmed that conclusion, even as it refused to overturn our century-old view that the Tucker Act's time bar is jurisdictional. No less than three times, John R. Sandapprovingly repeated Irwin's statement that the textual differences between the Tucker Act's time bar and § 2000e-16(c)were insignificant-i.e.,that the language of the two provisions could not explain why the former was jurisdictional and the latter not. See 552 U.S., at 137, 139, 128 S.Ct. 750(calling the provisions "linguistically similar," "similar ... in language," and "similarly worded"). But if that were so, John R. Sandasked, why not hold that the Tucker Act's time limit, like § 2000e-16(c), is nonjurisdictional? The answer came down to two words: stare decisis. The Tucker Act's bar was different because it had been the subject of "a definitive earlier interpretation." Id.,at 138, 128 S.Ct. 750; see id.,at 137, 128 S.Ct. 750; supra,at 1634. And for that reason alone, John R. Sandleft in place our prior construction of the Tucker Act's time limit. See 552 U.S., at 139, 128 S.Ct. 750(observing, in Justice Brandeis's words, that "it is more important that" the rule "be settled than that it be settled right" (quoting Burnet v. Coronado Oil & Gas Co.,285 U.S. 393, 406, 52 S.Ct. 443, 76 L.Ed. 815 (1932)(dissenting opinion))). What is special about the Tucker Act's deadline, John R. Sandrecognized, comes merely from this Court's prior rulings, not from Congress's choice of wording.
Irwin,however, forecloses that argument. After all, Irwinalso considered a pre-Irwintime bar attached to a waiver of sovereign immunity. The Government argued there-anticipating its claim here-that because § 2000e-16(c)'s statute of limitations conditioned such a waiver, it must be jurisdictional and not subject to equitable tolling. See Brief for Respondents 6, 10, 14, 19, and Tr. of Oral Arg. 31-37, inIrwin,O.T. 1990, No. 89-5867. But Irwindisagreed, applying the opposite presumption to a time limit passed two decades earlier. See 498 U.S., at 94-96, 111 S.Ct. 453; supra,at 1631. Justice White protested, much as the Government does now, that at the time of § 2000e-16(c)'s enactment, limitations statutes for suits against the Government were "strictly observed" and not amenable to tolling. 498 U.S., at 97, 111 S.Ct. 453(opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (quoting Soriano,352 U.S., at 276, 77 S.Ct. 269); see 498 U.S., at 99, n. 2, 111 S.Ct. 453. How could an earlier Congress, Justice White asked, have "had in mind the Court's present departure from that longstanding rule"? Ibid.; see post,at 1643 (asking a variant of the same question). But the IrwinCourt was undeterred. The Court noted that it had not applied the former rule so consistently as Justice White suggested. See 498 U.S., at 94, 111 S.Ct. 453. And the Court doubted that the former approach so well reflected congressional intent: On the contrary, because equitable tolling "amounts to little, if any, broadening of the congressional waiver," we thought that a rule generally allowing tolling is the more "realistic assessment of legislative intent." Id.,at 95, 111 S.Ct. 453; see supra,at 1631. For those reasons, the Court declined to count time bars as jurisdictional merely because they condition waivers of immunity-even if Congress enacted the deadline when the Court interpreted limitations statutes differently.
Justice ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice SCALIA, and Justice THOMAS join, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment.
Specifically, the metrics and standards alter the railroads' common-carrier obligations under 49 U.S.C. § 11101. Host railroads may enter into contracts with Amtrak under §§ 10908and 24308to fulfill their common-carrier obligations. The metrics and standards shape the types of contracts that satisfy the common-carrier obligations because § 207 provides that "Amtrak and its host rail carriers shall" include the metrics and standards in their contracts "[t]o the extent practicable." PRIIA § 207(c), 49 U.S.C. § 24101 (note)(emphasis added). As Justice ALITO explains, it matters little that the railroads may avoid incorporating the metrics and standards by arguing that incorporation is impracticable; the point is that they have a legal duty to try-a duty the substance of which is defined by the metrics and standards. See ante,at 1235 - 1236 (concurring opinion). And that duty is backed up by the Surface Transportation Board's coercive power to impose "reasonable terms" on host railroads when they fail to come to an agreement with Amtrak. § 24308(a)(2)(A)(ii). Presumably, when it is "practicable" to incorporate the metrics and standards, the Board is better positioned to deem such terms "reasonable" and to force them upon the railroads.
Justice SCALIA, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and Justice THOMAS join, dissenting.
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice THOMASjoins, dissenting.
Example One. The police have probable cause to believe that a register contains evidence of a crime. They go to a judge and get a search warrant. The hotel operator, however, refuses to surrender the register, but instead stashes it away. Officers could tear the hotel apart looking for it. Or they could simply order the operator to produce it. The Fourth Amendment does not create a right to defy a warrant. Hence § 41.49(3)(a) could be constitutionally applied in this scenario. Indeed, the Court concedes that it is proper to apply a California obstruction of justice law in such a case. See ante, at 2451 - 2452, n. 1; Brief for Respondents 49. How could applying a city law with a similar effect be different? No one thinks that overlapping laws are unconstitutional. See, e.g., Yates v. United States,574 U.S. ----, ----, 135 S.Ct. 1074, 1096, 191 L.Ed.2d 64 (2015)(KAGAN, J. dissenting) ("Overlap-even significant overlap-abounds in criminal law") (collecting citations). And a specific law gives more notice than a general law.
Justice SCALIA professes to be baffled at the idea that we could suggest that in certain circumstances, police officers may seize something that they cannot immediately search. Post,at 2461 - 2462 (dissenting opinion). But that is what this Court's cases have explicitly endorsed, including Rileyjust last Term.
The report of the decision in Harris comprises a per curiam opinion, an opinion concurring in the judgment by Judge Silver, and a dissenting opinion by Judge Wake. The per curiam opinion found "in favor of the Commission." 993 F.Supp.2d, at 1080. Deviations from the one-person, one-vote principle, the per curiam opinion explained at length, were "small" and, in the main, could not be attributed to partisanship. Ibid. While partisanship "may have played some role," the per curiam opinion stated, deviations were "predominantly a result of the Commission's good-faith efforts to achieve preclearance under the Voting Rights Act." Id., at 1060. Judge Silver, although she joined the per curiam opinion, made clear at the very outset of that opinion her finding that "partisanship did not play a role." Id., at 1046, n. 1. In her concurring opinion, she repeated her finding that the evidence did not show partisanship at work, id., at 1087; instead, she found, the evidence "[was] overwhelming [that] the final map was a product of the commissioners's consideration of appropriate redistricting criteria." Id., at 1088. To describe Harris as a decision criticizing the Commission for pervasive partisanship, post, at 2691, THE CHIEF JUSTICE could rely only upon the dissenting opinion, which expressed views the majority roundly rejected.
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice SCALIA, Justice THOMAS, and Justice ALITO join, dissenting.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, dissenting.
That adds up to two votes to affirm on the merits, two to reverse on the merits (without discussing standing) and four to dismiss for lack of standing. Justice Stanley Reed, who was on the Court and apparently participated in the case, is not mentioned in any of the opinions recorded in the United States Reports. So, in order to find Coleman a binding precedent on standing, rather than a 4-to-4 standoff, one must assume that Justice Reed voted with Hughes. There is some reason to make that assumption: The four Justices rejecting standing went on to discuss the merits, because "the ruling of the Court just announced removes from the case the question of petitioners' standing to sue." 307 U.S., at 456, 59 S.Ct. 972 (Black, J., concurring). But then again, if nine Justices participated, how could it be that on one of the two issues in the case the Court was "equally divided and therefore ... expresse[d] no opinion"? Id., at 447, 59 S.Ct. 972.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice SCALIA joins, dissenting.
13 In an endeavor to wish away Coleman, Justice SCALIA, in dissent, suggests the case may have been "a 4-to-4 standoff." Post, at 2696. He overlooks that Chief Justice Hughes' opinion, announced by Justice Stone, was styled "Opinion of the Court." 307 U.S., at 435, 59 S.Ct. 972. Describing Coleman, the Court wrote in Raines : "By a vote of 5-4, we held that [the 20 Kansas Senators who voted against ratification of a proposed federal constitutional amendment] had standing." 521 U.S., at 822, 117 S.Ct. 2312. For opinions recognizing the precedential weight of Coleman, see Baker v. Carr, 369 U.S. 186, 208, 82 S.Ct. 691, 7 L.Ed.2d 663 (1962); United States v. Windsor, 570 U.S. ----, ----, 133 S.Ct. 2675, 2713-2714, 186 L.Ed.2d 808 (2013) (ALITO, J., dissenting).
14 Curiously, Justice SCALIA, dissenting on standing, berates the Court for "treading upon the powers of state legislatures." Post, at 2697. He forgets that the party invoking federal-court jurisdiction in this case, and inviting our review, is the Arizona State Legislature.
Justice ALITO, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice SOTOMAYORjoins, dissenting.
I agree with much of the Court's opinion. Robins, the Court holds, meets the particularity requirement for standing under Article III. See ante, at 1548, 1550 (remanding only for concreteness inquiry). The Court acknowledges that Congress has the authority to confer rights and delineate claims for relief where none existed before. Ante, at 1549; see Federal Election Comm'n v. Akins, 524 U.S. 11, 19-20, 118 S.Ct. 1777, 141 L.Ed.2d 10 (1998)(holding that inability to procure information to which Congress has created a right in the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 qualifies as concrete injury satisfying Article III's standing requirement); Public Citizen v. Department of Justice, 491 U.S. 440, 449, 109 S.Ct. 2558, 105 L.Ed.2d 377 (1989)(holding that plaintiff advocacy organizations' inability to obtain information that Congress made subject to disclosure under the Federal Advisory Committee Act "constitutes a sufficiently distinct injury to provide standing to sue"); Havens Realty Corp. v. Coleman, 455 U.S. 363, 373, 102 S.Ct. 1114, 71 L.Ed.2d 214 (1982)(identifying, as Article III injury, violation of plaintiff's right, secured by the Fair Housing Act, to "truthful information concerning the availability of housing"). Congress' connection of procedural requirements to the prevention of a substantive harm, the Court appears to agree, is "instructive and important." Ante, at 1549; see Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 580, 112 S.Ct. 2130, 119 L.Ed.2d 351 (1992)(KENNEDY, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) ("As Government programs and policies become more complex and far reaching, we must be sensitive to the articulation of new rights of action...."); Brief for Restitution and Remedies Scholars et al. as Amici Curiae 3 ("Congress cannot authorize individual plaintiffs to enforce generalized rights that belong to the whole public. But Congress can create new individual rights, and it can enact effective remedies for those rights."). See generally Sunstein, Informational Regulation and Informational Standing: Akins and Beyond, 147 U. Pa. L. Rev. 613 (1999).
In determining whether an intangible harm constitutes injury in fact, both history and the judgment of Congress play important roles. Because the doctrine of standing derives from the case-or-controversy requirement, and because that requirement in turn is grounded in historical practice, it is instructive to consider whether an alleged intangible harm has a close relationship to a harm that has traditionally been regarded as providing a basis for a lawsuit in English or American courts. See Vermont Agency of Natural Resources v. United States ex rel. Stevens, 529 U.S. 765, 775-777, 120 S.Ct. 1858, 146 L.Ed.2d 836 (2000). In addition, because Congress is well positioned to identify intangible harms that meet minimum Article III requirements, its judgment is also instructive and important. Thus, we said in Lujan that Congress may "elevat[e] to the status of legally cognizable injuries concrete, de facto injuries that were previously inadequate in law." 504 U.S., at 578, 112 S.Ct. 2130. Similarly, Justice Kennedy's concurrence in that case explained that "Congress has the power to define injuries and articulate chains of causation that will give rise to a case or controversy where none existed before." Id., at 580, 112 S.Ct. 2130(opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment).
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice GINSBURGjoins, concurring in the judgment.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment.
Today, however, the majority inexplicably declares that "the logic of Griggsand Smith" leads to the conclusion that "the FHA encompasses disparate-impact claims." Ante,at 2518. Justice ALITO ably dismantles this argument. Post, at 2543 - 2547 (dissenting opinion). But, even if the majority were correct, I would not join it in following that "logic" here. "[E]rroneous precedents need not be extended to their logical end, even when dealing with related provisions that normally would be interpreted in lockstep. Otherwise, stare decisis,designed to be a principle of stability and repose, would become a vehicle of change ... distorting the law." CBOCS West, Inc. v. Humphries,553 U.S. 442, 469-470, 128 S.Ct. 1951, 170 L.Ed.2d 864 (2008)(THOMAS, J., dissenting) (footnote omitted). Making the same mistake in different areas of the law furthers neither certainty nor judicial economy. It furthers error.
Justice ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice SCALIA, and Justice THOMAS join, dissenting.
The circumstances in which the FHA was enacted only confirm what the text says. In 1968, "the predominant focus of antidiscrimination law was on intentional discrimination." Smith v. City of Jackson,544 U.S. 228, 258, 125 S.Ct. 1536, 161 L.Ed.2d 410 (2005)(O'Connor, J., concurring in judgment). The very "concept of disparate impact liability, by contrast, was quite novel." Ibid.(collecting citations). See also Tr. of Oral Arg. 15 ("JUSTICE GINSBURG: ... If we're going to be realistic about this, ... in 1968, when the Fair Housing Act passed, nobody knew anything about disparate impact"). It is anachronistic to think that Congress authorized disparate-impact claims in 1968 but packaged that striking innovation so imperceptibly in the FHA's text.
Griggs,of course, "holds" nothing of the sort. Indeed, even the plurality opinion in Smith(to say nothing of Justice SCALIA's controlling opinion or Justice O'Connor's opinion concurring in the judgment) did not understand Griggsto create such a rule. See 544 U.S., at 240, 125 S.Ct. 1536(plurality opinion) (relying on multiple considerations). If Griggsalready answered the question for all statutes (even those that do not use effects language), Smithis inexplicable.
Explaining that Griggs"represented the better reading of [Title VII's] statutory text," 544 U.S., at 235, 125 S.Ct. 1536a plurality of the Court concluded that the same reasoning pertained to § 4(a)(2) of the ADEA. The Smithplurality emphasized that both § 703(a)(2) of Title VII and § 4(a)(2) of the ADEA contain language "prohibit[ing] such actions that 'deprive any individual of employment opportunities or otherwise adversely affecthis status as an employee, because of such individual's' race or age." 544 U.S., at 235, 125 S.Ct. 1536. As the plurality observed, the text of these provisions "focuses on the effectsof the action on the employee rather than the motivation for the action of the employer" and therefore compels recognition of disparate-impact liability. Id.,at 236, 125 S.Ct. 1536. In a separate opinion, Justice SCALIA found the ADEA's text ambiguous and thus deferred under Chevron, U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.,467 U.S. 837, 104 S.Ct. 2778, 81 L.Ed.2d 694 (1984), to an Equal Employment Opportunity Commission regulation interpreting the ADEA to impose disparate-impact liability, see 544 U.S., at 243-247, 125 S.Ct. 1536(opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment).
The Court's Brechtapplication begins and ends with a discussion of particular arguments the Ninth Circuit posited Ayala's lawyers could have raised had they been present at his Batsonhearings. This approach fails to account for the basic background principle that must inform the application of Brechtto Ayala's procedural Batsonclaim: the "[c]ommon sense" insight "that secret decisions based on only one side of the story will prove inaccurate more often than those made after hearing from both sides." Kaley v. United States,571 U.S. ----, ----, 134 S.Ct. 1090, 1113, 188 L.Ed.2d 46 (2014)(ROBERTS, C.J., dissenting). Our entire criminal justice system was founded on the premise that "[t]ruth ... is best discovered by powerful statements on both sides of the question." United States v. Cronic,466 U.S. 648, 655, 104 S.Ct. 2039, 80 L.Ed.2d 657 (1984)(internal quotation marks omitted). There is no reason to believe that Batsonhearings are the rare exception to this rule. Instead, defense counsel could have played at least two critical roles had they been present at Ayala's Batsonhearings.
In ordering federal habeas relief based on their assessment of the responsiveness and completeness of Olanders D.'s answers, the members of the panel majority misunderstood the role of a federal court in a habeas case. The role of a federal habeas court is to " 'guard against extreme malfunctions in the state criminal justice systems,' " Richter,562 U.S., at 102-103, 131 S.Ct. 770(quoting Jackson v. Virginia,443 U.S. 307, 332, n. 5, 99 S.Ct. 2781, 61 L.Ed.2d 560 (1979)(Stevens, J., concurring in judgment)), not to apply de novoreview of factual findings and to substitute its own opinions for the determination made on the scene by the trial judge.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice THOMASjoins, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice SCALIA, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE joins, dissenting.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURG and Justice BREYER join, concurring.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice ALITO, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice SCALIA takes issue with our limitation of § 1344(2), contending first that the fraudster's "indifferen[ce] to the victim's method of payment" does not "cause what is a means not to be a means." Post, at 2396 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (emphasis deleted). To illustrate the point, he offers an example: Someone "obtain[s] 7-Eleven coffee by means of [his] two dollars" even if he went to 7-Eleven rather than Sheetz only because it happened to be the closest. Post, at 2396. But that objection is based on a misunderstanding of our opinion. The "by means of" phrase calls for an inquiry into the directness of the relationship between means and ends, not the fraudster's subjective intent. (We take it Justice SCALIA agrees; he recognizes that "not every but-for cause of an act is a cause 'by means of' which the act has occurred." Post, at 2396.) And we concur with the bottom line of Justice SCALIA'S example: There, the means (the two dollars) is the thing that achieves the specified end (getting the cup of 7-Eleven coffee). By contrast, for the reasons elaborated above, the misstatement in our handbag hypothetical is not the mechanism by which the fraudster obtains bank property, given that the lie will never reach the bank.
We need not settle this dispute. In Basic, the dissenting Justices made the same argument based on section 18(a) that Halliburton presses here. See 485 U.S., at 257-258, 108 S.Ct. 978 (White, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). The Basic majority did not find that argument persuasive then, and Halliburton has given us no new reason to endorse it now.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice BREYER and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, concurring.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice SCALIA and Justice ALITO join, concurring in the judgment.
Third, the one pre- Smith case involving the free-exercise rights of a for-profit corporation suggests, if anything, that for-profit corporations possess such rights. In Gallagher v. Crown Kosher Super Market of Mass., Inc., 366 U.S. 617, 81 S.Ct. 1122, 6 L.Ed.2d 536 (1961), the Massachusetts Sunday closing law was challenged by a kosher market that was organized as a for-profit corporation, by customers of the market, and by a rabbi. The Commonwealth argued that the corporation lacked "standing" to assert a free-exercise claim,26 but not one member of the Court expressed agreement with that argument. The plurality opinion for four Justices rejected the First Amendment claim on the merits based on the reasoning in Braunfeld, and reserved decision on the question whether the corporation had "standing" to raise the claim. See 366 U.S., at 631, 81 S.Ct. 1122. The three dissenters, Justices Douglas, Brennan, and Stewart, found the law unconstitutional as applied to the corporation and the other challengers and thus implicitly recognized their right to assert a free-exercise claim. See id., at 642, 81 S.Ct. 1122 (Brennan, J., joined by Stewart, J., dissenting); McGowan v. Maryland, 366 U.S. 420, 578-579, 81 S.Ct. 1101, 6 L.Ed.2d 393 (1961) (Douglas, J., dissenting as to related cases including Gallagher ). Finally, Justice Frankfurter's opinion, which was joined by Justice Harlan, upheld the Massachusetts law on the merits but did not question or reserve decision on the issue of the right of the corporation or any of the other challengers to be heard. See McGowan, 366 U.S., at 521-522, 81 S.Ct. 1101. It is quite a stretch to argue that RFRA, a law enacted to provide very broad protection for religious liberty, left for-profit corporations unprotected simply because in Gallagher-the only pre- Smith case in which the issue was raised-a majority of the Justices did not find it necessary to decide whether the kosher market's corporate status barred it from raising a free-exercise claim.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice Sotomayor joins, and with whom Justice BREYER and Justice KAGAN join as to all but Part III-C-1, dissenting.
Until this litigation, no decision of this Court recognized a for-profit corporation's qualification for a religious exemption from a generally applicable law, whether under the Free Exercise Clause or RFRA.13 The absence of such precedent is just what one would expect, for the exercise of religion is characteristic of natural persons, not artificial legal entities. As Chief Justice Marshall observed nearly two centuries ago, a corporation is "an artificial being, invisible, intangible, and existing only in contemplation of law." Trustees of Dartmouth College v. Woodward, 4 Wheat. 518, 636, 4 L.Ed. 629 (1819). Corporations, Justice Stevens more recently reminded, "have no consciences, no beliefs, no feelings, no thoughts, no desires." Citizens United v. Federal Election Comm'n, 558 U.S. 310, 466, 130 S.Ct. 876, 175 L.Ed.2d 753 (2010) (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part).
Justice BREYER and Justice KAGAN, dissenting.
We agree with Justice GINSBURG that the plaintiffs' challenge to the contraceptive coverage requirement fails on the merits. We need not and do not decide whether either for-profit corporations or their owners may bring claims under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993. Accordingly, we join all but Part III-C-1 of Justice GINSBURG's dissenting opinion.
Although the principal dissent seems to think that Justice Brennan's statement in Amos provides a ground for holding that for-profit corporations may not assert free-exercise claims, that was not Justice Brennan's view. See Gallagher v. Crown Kosher Super Market of Mass., Inc., 366 U.S. 617, 642, 81 S.Ct. 1122, 6 L.Ed.2d 536 (1961) (dissenting opinion); infra, at 2772 - 2773.
The Court points out that I joined the majority opinion in City of Boerne and did not then question the statement that "least restrictive means ... was not used [pre- Smith ]." Ante, at 2767, n. 18. Concerning that observation, I remind my colleagues of Justice Jackson's sage comment: "I see no reason why I should be consciously wrong today because I was unconsciously wrong yesterday." Massachusetts v. United States, 333 U.S. 611, 639-640, 68 S.Ct. 747, 92 L.Ed. 968 (1948) (dissenting opinion).
I part ways with Justice KENNEDY on the context relevant here. He sees it as the employers' "exercise [of] their religious beliefs within the context of their own closely held, for-profit corporations." Ante, at 2785 (concurring opinion). See also ante, at 2782 - 2783 (opinion of the Court) (similarly concentrating on religious faith of employers without reference to the different beliefs and liberty interests of employees). I see as the relevant context the employers' asserted right to exercise religion within a nationwide program designed to protect against health hazards employees who do not subscribe to their employers' religious beliefs.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice KAGANjoins, concurring.
Justice SCALIA, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment.
In invoking these principles, we disagree with Justice SCALIA's common-law-based opinion in two crucial ways. First, we view the common law's emphasis on special knowledge and expertise as supporting, rather than contradicting, our view of what issuers' opinion statements fairly imply. That is because an issuer has special knowledge of its business-including the legal issues the company faces-not available to an ordinary investor. Second, we think Justice SCALIA's reliance on the common law's requirement of an intent to deceive is inconsistent with § 11's standard of liability. As we understand him, Justice SCALIA would limit liability for omissions under § 11 to cases in which a speaker "subjectively intend[s] the deception" arising from the omission, on the ground that the common law did the same. Post,at 1336 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (emphasis deleted). But § 11 discards the common law's intent requirement, making omissions unlawful-regardless of the issuer's state of mind-so long as they render statements misleading. See Herman & MacLean,459 U.S., at 382, 103 S.Ct. 683(emphasizing that § 11 imposes liability "even for innocent" misstatements or omissions). The common law can help illuminate when an omission has that effect, but cannot change § 11's insistence on strict liability. See supra,at 1330, n. 9.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice THOMAS and Justice ALITO join, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice SCALIA and Justice ALITO join, concurring.
The principal dissent and Justice SCALIA respond to these holdings by relying on dictum in Goldberg v. Sweet,488 U.S. 252, 266, 109 S.Ct. 582, 102 L.Ed.2d 607 (1989), that it is not the purpose of the dormant Commerce Clause " 'to protect state residents from their own state taxes.' " Post,at 1814 (GINSBURG, J., dissenting); post, at 1809 - 1810 (SCALIA, J., dissenting). But we repudiated that dictum in West Lynn Creamery, Inc. v. Healy,512 U.S. 186, 114 S.Ct. 2205, 129 L.Ed.2d 157 (1994), where we stated that "[s]tate taxes are ordinarily paid by in-state businesses and consumers, yet if they discriminate against out-of-state products, they are unconstitutional."Id.,at 203, 114 S.Ct. 2205. And, of course, the dictum must bow to the holdings of our many cases entertaining Commerce Clause challenges brought by residents. We find the dissents' reliance on Goldberg's dictum particularly inappropriate since they do not find themselves similarly bound by the rule of that case, which applied the internal consistency test to determine whether the tax at issue violated the dormant Commerce Clause. 488 U.S., at 261, 109 S.Ct. 582.
Justice THOMAS also refuses to accept the dormant Commerce Clause doctrine, and he suggests that the Constitution was ratified on the understanding that it would not prevent a State from doing what Maryland has done here. He notes that some States imposed income taxes at the time of the adoption of the Constitution, and he observes that "[t]here is no indication that those early state income tax schemes provided credits for income taxes paid elsewhere." Post,at 1812 (dissenting opinion). "It seems highly implausible," he writes, "that those who ratified the Commerce Clause understood it to conflict with the income tax laws of their States and nonetheless adopted it without a word of concern." Ibid.This argument is plainly unsound.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice THOMASjoins as to Parts I and II, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice SCALIAjoins except as to the first paragraph, dissenting.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice SCALIAand Justice KAGANjoin, dissenting.
The principal dissent and Justice SCALIA inaccurately state that the Court in American Trucking"conceded that a trucking tax 'fail[ed] the "internal consistency" test,' but upheld the tax anyway." Post,at 1809 - 1810 (SCALIA, J., dissenting); see also post,at 1820 - 1821 (GINSBURG, J., dissenting). The Court did not say that the tax in question "failed the 'internal consistency test.' " The Court wrote that this is what petitioner argued. See American Trucking,545 U.S., at 437, 125 S.Ct. 2419. And the Court did not concede that this was true. The tax in that case was a flat tax on any truck that made point-to-point deliveries in Michigan. The tax therefore fell on all trucks that made solely intrastate deliveries and some that made interstate deliveries, namely, those that also made some intrastate deliveries. What the Court "concede[d]" was that "if all States [adopted a similar tax], an interstate truck would have to pay fees totaling several hundred dollars, or even several thousand dollars, were it to 'top off' its business by carrying local loads in many (or even all) other States." Id.,at 438, 125 S.Ct. 2419(emphasis added). But that was not the same as a concession that the tax violated the internal consistency test.
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice KENNEDYand Justice SOTOMAYORjoin, concurring.
Justice BREYER, concurring in the judgment.
Justice KAGAN, with whom Justice GINSBURGand Justice BREYERjoin, concurring in the judgment.
Even in trying (commendably) to limit today's decision, Justice ALITO's concurrence highlights its far-reaching effects. According to Justice ALITO, the majority does not subject to strict scrutiny regulations of "signs advertising a one-time event." Ante,at 2233 (ALITO, J., concurring). But of course it does. On the majority's view, a law with an exception for such signs "singles out specific subject matter for differential treatment" and "defin[es] regulated speech by particular subject matter." Ante,at 2227, 2230 (majority opinion). Indeed, the precise reason the majority applies strict scrutiny here is that "the Code singles out signs bearing a particular message: the time and location of a specific event." Ante,at 2231.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice GINSBURGjoins, dissenting.
Heien struggles to recast DeFillippoas a case solely about the exclusionary rule, not the Fourth Amendment itself. In his view, the officers' mistake of law resulted in a violation the Fourth Amendment, but suppression of the drugs was not the proper remedy. We did say in a footnote that suppression of the evidence found on DeFillippo would serve none of the purposes of the exclusionary rule. See id.,at 38, n. 3, 99 S.Ct. 2627. But that literally marginal discussion does not displace our express holding that the arrest was constitutionally valid because the officers had probable cause. See id.,at 40, 99 S.Ct. 2627. Nor, contrary to Heien's suggestion, did either United States v. Leon,468 U.S. 897, 104 S.Ct. 3405, 82 L.Ed.2d 677 (1984), or Illinois v. Gates,462 U.S. 213, 103 S.Ct. 2317, 76 L.Ed.2d 527 (1983), somehow erase that holding and transform DeFillippointo an exclusionary rule decision. See Brief for Petitioner 28-29. In Leon,we said DeFillippopaid "attention to the purposes underlying the exclusionary rule," but we also clarified that it did "not involv[e] the scope of the rule itself." 468 U.S., at 911-912, 104 S.Ct. 3405. As for Gates,only Justice White's separate opinion (joined by no other Justice) discussed DeFillippo,and it acknowledged that "DeFillippodid not modify the exclusionary rule itself" but instead "upheld the validity of an arrest." 462 U.S., at 256, n. 12, 103 S.Ct. 2317(opinion concurring in judgment).
Justice KAGAN, with whom Justice GINSBURGjoins, concurring.
In considering claims of Presidential power this Court refers to Justice Jackson's familiar tripartite framework from Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer,343 U.S. 579, 635-638, 72 S.Ct. 863, 96 L.Ed. 1153 (1952)(concurring opinion). The framework divides exercises of Presidential power into three categories: First, when "the President acts pursuant to an express or implied authorization of Congress, his authority is at its maximum, for it includes all that he possesses in his own right plus all that Congress can delegate." Id.,at 635, 72 S.Ct. 863. Second, "in absence of either a congressional grant or denial of authority" there is a "zone of twilight in which he and Congress may have concurrent authority," and where "congressional inertia, indifference or quiescence may" invite the exercise of executive power. Id.,at 637, 72 S.Ct. 863. Finally, when "the President takes measures incompatible with the expressed or implied will of Congress ... he can rely only upon his own constitutional powers minus any constitutional powers of Congress over the matter." Ibid.To succeed in this third category, the President's asserted power must be both "exclusive" and "conclusive" on the issue. Id.,at 637-638, 72 S.Ct. 863.
As Justice Jackson wrote in Youngstown,when a Presidential power is "exclusive," it "disabl[es] the Congress from acting upon the subject." 343 U.S., at 637-638, 72 S.Ct. 863(concurring opinion). Here, the subject is quite narrow: The Executive's exclusive power extends no further than his formal recognition determination. But as to that determination, Congress may not enact a law that directly contradicts it. This is not to say Congress may not express its disagreement with the President in myriad ways. For example, it may enact an embargo, decline to confirm an ambassador, or even declare war. But none of these acts would alter the President's recognition decision.
Justice SCALIA would locate Congress' power to enact the passport directive of § 214(d) in Congress' power under the Necessary and Proper Clause to bring into effect its enumerated power over naturalization. Post, at 2117 - 2118 (dissenting opinion). As an initial matter, he asserts that "[t]he naturalization power ... enables Congress to furnish the people it makes citizens with papers verifying their citizenship," post,at 2117, yet offers no support for this interpretation of a clause that, by its terms, grants Congress only the "Power ... To establish an uniform Rule of Naturalization," U.S. Const., Art. I, § 8, cl. 4. He then concludes that, if Congress can grant such documents, "it may also require these [documents] to record his birthplace as 'Israel' " pursuant to its power under the Necessary and Proper Clause, post,at 2117. But this theory does not account for the President's power to act in this area, nor does it confront difficult questions about the application of the Necessary and Proper Clause in the case of conflict among the branches.
In any event, the historical evidence cited in Justice SCALIA's dissent does not conflict with my analysis of the President's power in this area. The two postratification English statutes implicitly acknowledged that passports are issued by executive officers in the exercise of executive power, see 38 Geo. III, ch. 50, § 8, in 41 Eng. Stat. at Large 684; 33 Geo. III, ch. 4, § 8, in 39 Eng. Stat. at Large 12, and the practice of executive officials in the States of this country confirms that relationship. In addition, neither piece of historical evidence speaks to the scope of Congress' power to regulate passports under our federal system. Justice SCALIA's final piece of historical support-the increased congressional regulation of passports following the Civil War-is perhaps more on point from an institutional perspective, but still does not resolve the issue. Those regulations were, as I have already described, narrow in scope and continued to leave primary regulation of the content of passports to the President. To draw an inference from these "late-arising historical practices that are ambiguous at best"-and that might conflict with the original meaning of the "executive Power" and the "proper" requirement in the Necessary and Proper Clause-is a dubious way to undertake constitutional analysis. See Noel Canning,573 U.S., at ----, 134 S.Ct., at 2592(SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment).
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice ALITOjoins, dissenting.
Justice SCALIA, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and Justice ALITO join, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS's concurrence deems § 214(d) constitutional to the extent it regulates birth reports, but unconstitutional to the extent it regulates passports. Ante,at 2101 - 2102 (opinion concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part). The concurrence finds no congressional power that would extend to the issuance or contents of passports. Including the power to regulate foreign commerce-even though passports facilitate the transportation of passengers, "a part of our commerce with foreign nations," Henderson v. Mayor of New York,92 U.S. 259, 270, 23 L.Ed. 543 (1876). Including the power over naturalization-even though passports issued to citizens, like birth reports, "have the same force and effect as proof of United States citizenship as certificates of naturalization," 22 U.S.C. § 2705. Including the power to enforce the Fourteenth Amendment's guarantee that "[a]ll persons born or naturalized in the United States ... are citizens of the United States"-even though a passport provides evidence of citizenship and so helps enforce this guarantee abroad. Including the power to exclude persons from the territory of the United States, see Art. I, § 9, cl. 1-even though passports are the principal means of identifying citizens entitled to entry. Including the powers under which Congress has restricted the ability of various people to leave the country (fugitives from justice, for example, see 18 U.S.C. § 1073)-even though passports are the principal means of controlling exit. Including the power to "make all needful Rules and Regulations respecting the Territory or other Property belonging to the United States," Art. IV, § 3, cl. 2-even though "[a] passport remains at all times the property of the United States," 7 FAM § 1317 (2013). The concurrence's stingy interpretation of the enumerated powers forgets that the Constitution does not "partake of the prolixity of a legal code," that "only its great outlines [are] marked, its important objects designated, and the minor ingredients which compose those objects [left to] be deduced from the nature of the objects themselves." McCulloch,4 Wheat., at 407. It forgets, in other words, "that it is a constitutionwe are expounding." Ibid.
That brings me, in analytic crescendo, to the concurrence's suggestion that even ifCongress's enumerated powers otherwise encompass § 214(d), and even ifthe President's power to regulate the contents of passports is not exclusive, the law might stillviolate the Constitution, because it "conflict[s]" with the President's passport policy. Ante,at 2093. It turns the Constitution upside-down to suggest that in areas of shared authority, it is the executive policy that preempts the law, rather than the other way around. Congress maymake laws necessary and proper for carrying into execution the President's powers, Art. I, § 8, cl. 18, but the President must"take Care" that Congress's legislation "be faithfully executed," Art. II, § 3. And Acts of Congress made in pursuance of the Constitution are the "supreme Law of the Land"; acts of the President (apart from treaties) are not. Art. VI, cl. 2. That is why Chief Justice Marshall was right to think that a law prohibiting the seizure of foreign ships trumped a military order requiring it. Little v. Barreme,2 Cranch 170, 178-179, 2 L.Ed. 243 (1804). It is why Justice Jackson was right to think that a President who "takes measures incompatible with the expressed or implied will of Congress" may "rely only upon his own constitutional powers minus any constitutional powers of Congress over the matter." Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer,343 U.S. 579, 637, 72 S.Ct. 863, 96 L.Ed. 1153 (1952)(concurring opinion) (emphasis added). And it is why Justice THOMAS is wrong to think that even if § 214(d) operates in a field of shared authority the President might still prevail.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice SOTOMAYORjoins, concurring.
Four years later, in Sykes v. United States,564 U.S. 1, 131 S.Ct. 2267, 180 L.Ed.2d 60 (2011), Justice SCALIA fired another round. Dissenting once again, he argued that the residual clause is void for vagueness and rehearsed the same basic arguments that the Court now adopts. See id.,at ---- - ----, 131 S.Ct., at 2273-2274; see also Derby v. United States,564 U.S. ----, ---- - ----, 131 S.Ct. 2858, 2859-2860, 180 L.Ed.2d 904 (2011)(SCALIA, J., dissenting from denial of certiorari). As in James,the Court rejected his arguments. See Sykes,564 U.S., at ----, 131 S.Ct., at 2276-2277. In fact, Justice SCALIA was the onlyMember of the SykesCourt who took the position that the residual clause could not be intelligibly applied to the offense at issue. The opinion of the Court, which five Justices joined, expressly held that the residual clause "states an intelligible principle and provides guidance that allows a person to 'conform his or her conduct to the law.' " Id.,at ---- - ----, 131 S.Ct., at 2277(quoting Chicago v. Morales,527 U.S. 41, 58, 119 S.Ct. 1849, 144 L.Ed.2d 67 (1999)(plurality opinion)). Justice THOMAS's concurrence, while disagreeing in part with the Court's interpretation of the residual clause, did not question its constitutionality. See Sykes,564 U.S., at ----, 131 S.Ct., at ---- (opinion concurring in judgment). And Justice KAGAN's dissent, which Justice GINSBURG joined, argued that a proper application of the provision required a different result. See id.,at ----, 131 S.Ct., at ----. Thus, eight Members of the Court found the statute capable of principled application.
Reprising an argument that Justice SCALIA made to no avail in Sykes, supra,at ----, 131 S.Ct., at 2287(dissenting opinion), the Court reasons that the residual clause must be unconstitutionally vague because we have had trouble settling on an interpretation. See ante,at 2558 - 2559. But disagreement about the meaning and application of the clause is not new. We were divided in Jamesand in Sykesand in our intervening decisions in Begay v. United States,553 U.S. 137, 128 S.Ct. 1581, 170 L.Ed.2d 490 (2008), and Chambers v. United States, 555 U.S. 122, 129 S.Ct. 687, 172 L.Ed.2d 484 (2009). And that pattern is not unique to ACCA; we have been unable to come to an agreement on many recurring legal questions. The Confrontation Clause is one example that comes readily to mind. See, e.g., Williams v. Illinois,567 U.S. ----, 132 S.Ct. 2221, 183 L.Ed.2d 89 (2012); Bullcoming v. New Mexico,564 U.S. ----, 131 S.Ct. 2705, 180 L.Ed.2d 610 (2011); Melendez-Diaz v. Massachusetts,557 U.S. 305, 129 S.Ct. 2527, 174 L.Ed.2d 314 (2009). Our disagreements about the meaning of that provision do not prove that the Confrontation Clause has no ascertainable meaning. Likewise, our disagreements on the residual clause do not prove that it is unconstitutionally vague.
The closing words of this definition, italicized above, have come to be known as the Act's residual clause. Since 2007, this Court has decided four cases attempting to discern its meaning. We have held that the residual clause (1) covers Florida's offense of attempted burglary, James v. United States,550 U.S. 192, 127 S.Ct. 1586, 167 L.Ed.2d 532 (2007); (2) does notcover New Mexico's offense of driving under the influence, Begay v. United States,553 U.S. 137, 128 S.Ct. 1581, 170 L.Ed.2d 490 (2008); (3) does not cover Illinois' offense of failure to report to a penal institution, Chambers v. United States,555 U.S. 122, 129 S.Ct. 687, 172 L.Ed.2d 484 (2009); and (4) does cover Indiana's offense of vehicular flight from a law-enforcement officer, Sykes v. United States,564 U.S. 1, 131 S.Ct. 2267, 180 L.Ed.2d 60 (2011). In both Jamesand Sykes, the Court rejected suggestions by dissenting Justices that the residual clause violates the Constitution's prohibition of vague criminal laws. Compare James, 550 U.S., at 210, n. 6, 127 S.Ct. 1586, with id.,at 230, 127 S.Ct. 1586(SCALIA, J., dissenting); compare Sykes, 564 U.S., at ----, 131 S.Ct., at 2276-2277, with id.,at ----, 131 S.Ct., at 2286-2288(SCALIA, J., dissenting).
Justice KENNEDY, concurring in the judgment.
In my view, and for the reasons well stated by Justice ALITO in dissent, the residual clause of the Armed Career Criminal Act is not unconstitutionally vague under the categorical approach or a record-based approach. On the assumption that the categorical approach ought to still control, and for the reasons given by Justice THOMAS in Part I of his opinion concurring in the judgment, Johnson's conviction for possession of a short-barreled shotgun does not qualify as a violent felony.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment.
The majority wants more. Not content to engage in the usual business of interpreting statutes, it holds this clause to be unconstitutionally vague, notwithstanding the fact that on four previous occasions we found it determinate enough for judicial application. As Justice ALITO explains, that decision cannot be reconciled with our precedents concerning the vagueness doctrine. See post, at 2580 - 2581 (dissenting opinion). But even if it were a closer case under those decisions, I would be wary of holding the residual clause to be unconstitutionally vague. Although I have joined the Court in applying our modern vagueness doctrine in the past, see FCC v. Fox Television Stations, Inc., 567 U.S. ----, ---- - ----, 132 S.Ct. 2307, 2319-2320, 183 L.Ed.2d 234 (2012), I have become increasingly concerned about its origins and application. Simply put, our vagueness doctrine shares an uncomfortably similar history with substantive due process, a judicially created doctrine lacking any basis in the Constitution.
Justice ALITO shows why that analysis is wrong under our precedents. See post, at 2580 - 2583 (dissenting opinion). But I have some concerns about our modern vagueness doctrine itself. Whether that doctrine is defensible under the original meaning of "due process of law" is a difficult question I leave for the another day, but the doctrine's history should prompt us at least to examine its constitutional underpinnings more closely before we use it to ify yet another duly enacted law.
I need not choose between these two understandings of "due process of law" in this case. Justice ALITO explains why the majority's decision is wrong even under our precedents. See post, at 2580 - 2583 (dissenting opinion). And more generally, I adhere to the view that " '[i]f any fool would know that a particular category of conduct would be within the reach of the statute, if there is an unmistakable core that a reasonable person would know is forbidden by the law, the enactment is not unconstitutional on its face,' " Morales, supra,at 112, 119 S.Ct. 1849(THOMAS, J., dissenting), and there is no question that ACCA's residual clause meets that description, see ante,at 2568 (agreeing with the Government that "there will be straightforward cases under the residual clause").
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice KENNEDYand Justice KAGANjoin, and with whom Justice THOMASjoins as to all but the final sentence, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice ALITOjoins, dissenting.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice KENNEDYjoins, dissenting.
Justice SCALIA, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice THOMAS, and Justice ALITO join, dissenting.
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice GINSBURGjoins, and with whom Justice THOMASjoins as to Part I, dissenting.
Our decisions in Caballesand Johnsonheed these constraints. In both cases, we concluded that the Fourth Amendment tolerated certain unrelated investigations that did not lengthen the roadside detention. Johnson,555 U.S., at 327-328, 129 S.Ct. 781(questioning);Caballes,543 U.S., at 406, 408, 125 S.Ct. 834(dog sniff). In Caballes,however, we cautioned that a traffic stop "can become unlawful if it is prolonged beyond the time reasonably required to complete th[e] mission" of issuing a warning ticket. 543 U.S., at 407, 125 S.Ct. 834. And we repeated that admonition in Johnson: The seizure remains lawful only "so long as [unrelated] inquiries do not measurably extend the duration of the stop." 555 U.S., at 333, 129 S.Ct. 781. See also Muehler v. Mena,544 U.S. 93, 101, 125 S.Ct. 1465, 161 L.Ed.2d 299 (2005)(because unrelated inquiries did not "exten[d] the time [petitioner] was detained[,] ... no additional Fourth Amendment justification ... was required"). An officer, in other words, may conduct certain unrelated checks during an otherwise lawful traffic stop. But contrary to Justice ALITO's suggestion, post, at 1625, n. 2, he may not do so in a way that prolongs the stop, absent the reasonable suspicion ordinarily demanded to justify detaining an individual. But see post,at 1623 - 1624 (ALITO, J., dissenting) (premising opinion on the dissent's own finding of "reasonable suspicion," although the District Court reached the opposite conclusion, and the Court of Appeals declined to consider the issue).
The Government argues that an officer may "incremental[ly]" prolong a stop to conduct a dog sniff so long as the officer is reasonably diligent in pursuing the traffic-related purpose of the stop, and the overall duration of the stop remains reasonable in relation to the duration of other traffic stops involving similar circumstances. Brief for United States 36-39. The Government's argument, in effect, is that by completing all traffic-related tasks expeditiously, an officer can earn bonus time to pursue an unrelated criminal investigation. See also post, at 1617 - 1619 (THOMAS, J., dissenting) (embracing the Government's argument). The reasonableness of a seizure, however, depends on what the police in fact do. See Knowles,525 U.S., at 115-117, 119 S.Ct. 484. In this regard, the Government acknowledges that "an officer always has to be reasonably diligent." Tr. of Oral Arg. 49. How could diligence be gauged other than by noting what the officer actually did and how he did it? If an officer can complete traffic-based inquiries expeditiously, then that is the amount of "time reasonably required to complete [the stop's] mission." Caballes,543 U.S., at 407, 125 S.Ct. 834. As we said in Caballesand reiterate today, a traffic stop "prolonged beyond" that point is "unlawful." Ibid.The critical question, then, is not whether the dog sniff occurs before or after the officer issues a ticket, as Justice ALITO supposes, post, at 1624 - 1625, but whether conducting the sniff "prolongs"-i.e., adds time to-"the stop," supra,at 1615.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice SOTOMAYOR joins as to Parts I and II, dissenting.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice THOMAS and Justice BREYER join, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice SOTOMAYOR joins, concurring in the judgment.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice THOMAS and Justice ALITO join, dissenting.
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice ALITOjoins as to Part II, concurring.
I agree with Justice THOMAS that our decision in Anderson v. Mt. Clemens Pottery Co., 328 U.S. 680, 66 S.Ct. 1187, 90 L.Ed. 1515 (1946), does not provide a "special, relaxed rule authorizing plaintiffs to use otherwise inadequate representative evidence in FLSA-based cases." Post, at 1056 (dissenting opinion). But I do not read the Court's opinion to be inconsistent with that conclusion. Rather, I take the Court to conclude that Dr. Mericle's study constituted sufficient proof from which the jury could find "the amount and extent of [each individual respondent's] work as a matter of just and reasonable inference"-the same standard of proof that would apply in any case. Ante, at 1047 (internal quotation marks omitted). It is with that understanding that I join the opinion of the Court.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice ALITOjoins, dissenting.
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice THOMASjoins, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice ALITO joins, dissenting.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins as to Parts I, II, and III, dissenting.
Justice KAGAN, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins, dissenting.
Justice ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice SCALIA, and Justice KENNEDY join, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice ALITO joins, concurring.
Justice SOTOMAYOR suggests that, for such claims, we should adopt the factors announced in Barker v. Wingo, 407 U.S. 514, 530-533, 92 S.Ct. 2182, 33 L.Ed.2d 101 (1972). Post, at 1619 (concurring opinion). I would not prejudge that matter. The factors listed in Barker may not necessarily translate to the delayed sentencing context. The Due Process Clause can be satisfied where a State has adequate procedures to redress an improper deprivation of liberty or property. See Parratt v. Taylor, 451 U.S. 527, 537, 101 S.Ct. 1908, 68 L.Ed.2d 420 (1981). In unusual cases where trial courts fail to sentence a defendant within a reasonable time, a State might fully satisfy due process by making traditional extraordinary legal remedies, such as mandamus, available. Or, much like the federal Speedy Trial Act regulates trials, see 18 U.S.C. § 3161, a State might remedy improper sentencing delay by statute. And a person who sleeps on these remedies, as Betterman did, may simply have no right to complain that his sentencing was delayed. We should await a proper presentation, full briefing, and argument before taking a position on this issue.
While emphasizing that the exigent-circumstances exception must be applied on a case-by-case basis, the McNeely Court noted that other exceptions to the warrant requirement "apply categorically" rather than in a "case-specific" fashion. Id., at ----, n. 3, 133 S.Ct., at 1559, n. 3. One of these, as the McNeely opinion recognized, is the long-established rule that a warrantless search may be conducted incident to a lawful arrest. See ibid . But the Court pointedly did not address any potential justification for warrantless testing of drunk-driving suspects except for the exception "at issue in th[e] case," namely, the exception for exigent circumstances. Id., at ----, 133 S.Ct., at 1558. Neither did any of the Justices who wrote separately. See id., at ---- - ----, 133 S.Ct., at 1568-1569(KENNEDY, J., concurring in part); id., at ---- - ----, 133 S.Ct., at 1569-1574(ROBERTS, C.J., concurring in part and dissenting in part); id., at ---- - ----, 133 S.Ct., at 1574-1578(THOMAS, J., dissenting).
Justice SOTOMAYOR's partial dissent suggests that States' interests in fighting drunk driving are satisfied once suspected drunk drivers are arrested, since such arrests take intoxicated drivers off the roads where they might do harm. See post, at 2191 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). But of course States are not solely concerned with neutralizing the threat posed by a drunk driver who has already gotten behind the wheel. They also have a compelling interest in creating effective "deterrent[s] to drunken driving" so such individuals make responsible decisions and do not become a threat to others in the first place. Mackey, supra, at 18, 99 S.Ct. 2612.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURGjoins, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part.
Justice THOMAS partly dissents from this holding, calling any distinction between breath and blood tests "an arbitrary line in the sand." Post, at 2197 (opinion concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part). Adhering to a position that the Court rejected in McNeely, Justice THOMAS would hold that both breath and blood tests are constitutional with or without a warrant because of the natural metabolization of alcohol in the bloodstream. Post, at 2187 - 2189. Yet Justice THOMAS does not dispute our conclusions that blood draws are more invasive than breath tests, that breath tests generally serve state interests in combating drunk driving as effectively as blood tests, and that our decision in Riley calls for a balancing of individual privacy interests and legitimate state interests to determine the reasonableness of the category of warrantless search that is at issue. Contrary to Justice THOMAS's contention, this balancing does not leave law enforcement officers or lower courts with unpredictable rules, because it is categorical and not "case-by-case," post, at 2187. Indeed, today's decision provides very clear guidance that the Fourth Amendment allows warrantless breath tests, but as a general rule does not allow warrantless blood draws, incident to a lawful drunk-driving arrest.
Justice BREYER, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice KENNEDY, Justice GINSBURG, and Justice KAGANjoin, dissenting.
That is not to say that the Court of Appeals in this case necessarily applied § 30(A) correctly. Indeed, there are good reasons to think the court construed § 30(A) to impose an overly stringent obligation on the States. While the Ninth Circuit has understood § 30(A) to compel States to "rely on responsible cost studies," and to reimburse for services at rates that "approximate the cost of quality care provided efficiently and economically," Orthopaedic Hospital v. Belshe,103 F.3d 1491, 1496 (1997), other courts have read § 30(A) to require only that rates be high enough to ensure that services are availableto Medicaid participants. See Pennsylvania Pharmacists Assn. v. Houstoun,283 F.3d 531, 538 (C.A.3 2002); Evergreen Presbyterian Ministries, Inc. v. Hood,235 F.3d 908, 928-929 (C.A.5 2000); Methodist Hospitals, Inc. v. Sullivan,91 F.3d 1026, 1030 (C.A.7 1996). This Court declined to grant certiorari to address whether the Ninth Circuit's reading of § 30(A) is correct. See 573 U.S. ----, 135 S.Ct. 44, 189 L.Ed.2d 897 (2014). But Justice BREYER, in his concurrence, appears to mistake that question about the merits of the Ninth Circuit's standard for the question this Court actually granted certiorari to address-that is, whether § 30 is judicially enforceable at all. See ante,at 1389 - 1390 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment). To answer that question, one need only recognize, as Justice BREYER does, that "federal courts have long become accustomed to reviewing for reasonableness or constitutionality the rate-setting determinations made by agencies." Ante,at 1389. A private party who invokes the jurisdiction of the federal courts in order to enjoin a state agency's implementation of rates that are so unreasonably low as to violate § 30(A) seeks a determination of exactly this sort.* * *
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice KENNEDY and Justice ALITO join, concurring.
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice SOTOMAYOR joins, dissenting.
Concurring in the Court's opinion, Justice BREYER worries that "[i]f each State is free to go its own way, ... the result could well be unnecessary, duplicative, and conflicting reporting requirements." Ante, at 949. In support, Justice BREYER cites a 2011 report. A. Costello & M. Taylor, APCD Council & NAHDO, Standardization of Data Collection in All-Payer Claims Databases 1 (Jan. 1 online 2011), at https://www.apcdcouncil.org/publication/standardization-data-collection-all-payer-claims-databases. In fact, the organizations that published this report inform us, in a brief supporting Vermont, that "submitting claims data to [all-payer claims databases] ... is a routine, straightforward process" and that States and private organizations have worked in recent years to standardize data-reporting requirements. Brief for National Association of Health Data Organizations et al. as Amici Curiae 13.
Even if the Court's holding were limited to federal courts, Article III would not justify it. The nature of "judicial power" may constrain the retroactivity rules that Article III courts can apply. But even our broad modern precedents treat Article III as requiring courts to apply new rules only on direct review. Thus in Griffith v. Kentucky, 479 U.S. 314, 107 S.Ct. 708, 93 L.Ed.2d 649 (1987), the Court suggested-based on Justice Harlan's views-that "after we have decided a new rule in the case selected, the integrity of judicial review requires that we apply that rule to all similar cases pending on direct review." Id., at 322-323, 107 S.Ct. 708. But, as Justice Harlan had explained, that view of Article III has no force on collateral review: "While the entire theoretical underpinnings of judicial review and constitutional supremacy dictate that federal courts having jurisdiction on direct review adjudicate every issue of law ... fairly implicated by the trial process below and properly presented on appeal, federal courts have never had a similar obligation on habeas corpus." Mackey v. United States, 401 U.S. 667, 682, 91 S.Ct. 1160, 28 L.Ed.2d 404 (1971) (opinion concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part).
The category of substantive rules discussed in Teague originated in Justice Harlan's approach to retroactivity. Teague adopted that reasoning. See 489 U.S., at 292, 312, 109 S.Ct. 1060 (discussing Mackey v. United States, 401 U.S. 667, 692, 91 S.Ct. 1160, 28 L.Ed.2d 404 (1971) (opinion concurring in judgments in part and dissenting in part); and Desist v. United States, 394 U.S. 244, 261, n. 2, 89 S.Ct. 1030, 22 L.Ed.2d 248 (1969) (Harlan, J., dissenting)). Justice Harlan defined substantive constitutional rules as "those that place, as a matter of constitutional interpretation, certain kinds of primary, private individual conduct beyond the power of the criminal law-making authority to proscribe." Mackey, supra, at 692, 91 S.Ct. 1160. In Penry v. Lynaugh, decided four months after Teague, the Court recognized that "the first exception set forth in Teague should be understood to cover not only rules forbidding criminal punishment of certain primary conduct but also rules prohibiting a certain category of punishment for a class of defendants because of their status or offense." 492 U.S., at 330, 109 S.Ct. 2934. Penry explained that Justice Harlan's first exception spoke "in terms of substantive categorical guarantees accorded by the Constitution, regardless of the procedures followed." Id., at 329, 109 S.Ct. 2934. Whether a new rule bars States from proscribing certain conduct or from inflicting a certain punishment, "[i]n both cases, the Constitution itself deprives the State of the power to impose a certain penalty." Id., at 330, 109 S.Ct. 2934.
In support of its holding that a conviction obtained under an unconstitutional law warrants habeas relief, the Siebold Court explained that "[a]n unconstitutional law is void, and is as no law." Ibid. A penalty imposed pursuant to an unconstitutional law is no less void because the prisoner's sentence became final before the law was held unconstitutional. There is no grandfather clause that permits States to enforce punishments the Constitution forbids. To conclude otherwise would undercut the Constitution's substantive guarantees. Writing for the Court in United States Coin & Currency, Justice Harlan made this point when he declared that "[n]o circumstances call more for the invocation of a rule of complete retroactivity" than when "the conduct being penalized is constitutionally immune from punishment." 401 U.S., at 724, 91 S.Ct. 1041. United States Coin & Currency involved a case on direct review; yet, for the reasons explained in this opinion, the same principle should govern the application of substantive rules on collateral review. As Justice Harlan explained, where a State lacked the power to proscribe the habeas petitioner's conduct, "it could not constitutionally insist that he remain in jail." Desist, supra, at 261, n. 2, 89 S.Ct. 1030 (dissenting opinion).
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice THOMAS and Justice ALITO join, dissenting.
Teague announced that federal courts could not grant habeas corpus to overturn state convictions on the basis of a "new rule" of constitutional law-meaning one announced after the convictions became final-unless that new rule was a "substantive rule" or a "watershed rul[e] of criminal procedure." 489 U.S., at 311, 109 S.Ct. 1060. The Teague prescription followed from Justice Harlan's view of the "retroactivity problem" detailed in his separate opinion in Desist v. United States, 394 U.S. 244, 256, 89 S.Ct. 1030, 22 L.Ed.2d 248 (1969) (dissenting opinion), and later in Mackey v. United States, 401 U.S. 667, 675, 91 S.Ct. 1160, 28 L.Ed.2d 404 (1971) (opinion concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part). Placing the rule's first exception in context requires more analysis than the majority has applied.
The Court in the mid-20th century was confounded by what Justice Harlan called the "swift pace of constitutional change," Pickelsimer v. Wainwright, 375 U.S. 2, 4, 84 S.Ct. 80, 11 L.Ed.2d 41 (1963) (dissenting opinion), as it vacated and remanded many cases in the wake of Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335, 83 S.Ct. 792, 9 L.Ed.2d 799 (1963). Justice Harlan called upon the Court to engage in "informed and deliberate consideration" of "whether the States are constitutionally required to apply [Gideon 's] new rule retrospectively, which may well require the reopening of cases long since finally adjudicated in accordance with then applicable decisions of this Court." Pickelsimer, supra, at 3, 84 S.Ct. 80. The Court answered that call in Linkletter v. Walker, 381 U.S. 618, 85 S.Ct. 1731, 14 L.Ed.2d 601 (1965). Linkletter began with the premise "that we are neither required to apply, nor prohibited from applying, a decision retrospectively" and went on to adopt an equitable rule-by-rule approach to retroactivity, considering "the prior history of the rule in question, its purpose and effect, and whether retrospective operation will further or retard its operation." Id., at 629, 85 S.Ct. 1731.
The Linkletter framework proved unworkable when the Court began applying the rule-by-rule approach not only to cases on collateral review but also to cases on direct review, rejecting any distinction "between convictions now final" and "convictions at various stages of trial and direct review." Stovall v. Denno, 388 U.S. 293, 300, 87 S.Ct. 1967, 18 L.Ed.2d 1199 (1967). It was this rejection that drew Justice Harlan's reproach in Desist and later in Mackey . He urged that "all 'new' rules of constitutional law must, at a minimum, be applied to all those cases which are still subject to direct review by this Court at the time the 'new' decision is handed down." Desist, supra, at 258, 89 S.Ct. 1030 (dissenting opinion). "Simply fishing one case from the stream of appellate review, using it as a vehicle for pronouncing new constitutional standards, and then permitting a stream of similar cases subsequently to flow by unaffected by that new rule constitute an indefensible departure from th[e] model of judicial review." Mackey, supra, at 679, 91 S.Ct. 1160.
Because of the Supremacy Clause, says the majority. Ante, at 731. But the Supremacy Clause cannot possibly answer the question before us here. It only elicits another question: What federal law is supreme? Old or new? The majority's champion, Justice Harlan, said the old rules apply for federal habeas review of a state-court conviction: "[T]he habeas court need only apply the constitutional standards that prevailed at the time the original proceedings took place," Desist, 394 U.S., at 263, 89 S.Ct. 1030 (dissenting opinion), for a state court cannot "toe the constitutional mark" that does not yet exist, Mackey, 401 U.S., at 687, 91 S.Ct. 1160 (opinion of Harlan, J.). Following his analysis, we have clarified time and again-recently in Greene v. Fisher, 565 U.S. ----, ---- - ----, 132 S.Ct. 38, 43-44, 181 L.Ed.2d 336 (2011) -that federal habeas courts are to review state-court decisions against the law and factual record that existed at the time the decisions were made. "Section 2254(d)(1) [of the federal habeas statute] refers, in the past tense, to a state-court adjudication that 'resulted in' a decision that was contrary to, or 'involved' an unreasonable application of, established law. This backward-looking language requires an examination of the state-court decision at the time it was made." Cullen v. Pinholster, 563 U.S. 170, 181-182, 131 S.Ct. 1388, 179 L.Ed.2d 557 (2011). How can it possibly be, then, that the Constitution requires a state court's review of its own convictions to be governed by "new rules" rather than (what suffices when federal courts review state courts) "old rules"?
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE joins, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS sets forth why he believes Evans was wrongly decided. Ante, at 1437 (dissenting opinion). No party asks us to overrule Evans in this case and so that question is not considered here.
Justice THOMAS argues that Evans was wrongly decided, and his position makes sense to the extent that he simply refuses to accept that case. But it founders insofar as it suggests that even if Evans is accepted in relation to substantive Hobbs Act charges, it should not be extended to conspiracy cases. See post, at 1437 (dissenting opinion) ("I would not extend Evans ' errors further"); post, at 1438 ("[The Court's] holding ... needlessly extends Evans ' error to the conspiracy context"); post, at 1439 ("The Court today takes another step away from the common-law understanding of extortion that the Hobbs Act adopted"). It would be very strange if a provision of the criminal code meant one thing with respect to charges of a substantive violation but something very different in cases involving a conspiracy to commit the same offense.
Nor does the text of the FAA compel this result. Section 2, on which the Court relied in Concepcion, Italian Colors, and this case, prescribes simply that arbitration provisions are to be treated the same as other contractual terms: "[a] written provision in ... a contract evidencing a transaction involving commerce to settle by arbitration a controversy ... shall be valid, irrevocable, and enforceable, save upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of any contract." 9 U.S.C. § 2. As Justice O'Connor observed when the Court was just beginning to transform the FAA into what it has become, "the Court has abandoned all pretense of ascertaining congressional intent with respect to the Federal Arbitration Act, building instead, case by case, an edifice of its own creation." Allied-Bruce Terminix Cos. v. Dobson, 513 U.S. 265, 283, 115 S.Ct. 834, 130 L.Ed.2d 753 (1995) (concurring opinion). See also Miller,supra, at 324 ("[O]ver the years the Act has been transformed by the Supreme Court through constant expansion into an expression of a 'federal policy' favoring arbitration, whether it involves a bilateral business dispute or not.").
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice SCALIA and Justice THOMAS join, dissenting.
The dissenting Justices in Lochner explained that the New York law could be viewed as a reasonable response to legislative concern about the health of bakery employees, an issue on which there was at least "room for debate and for an honest difference of opinion." Id., at 72, 25 S.Ct. 539 (opinion of Harlan, J.). The majority's contrary conclusion required adopting as constitutional law "an economic theory which a large part of the country does not entertain." Id., at 75, 25 S.Ct. 539 (opinion of Holmes, J.). As Justice Holmes memorably put it, "The Fourteenth Amendment does not enact Mr. Herbert Spencer's Social Statics," a leading work on the philosophy of Social Darwinism. Ibid. The Constitution "is not intended to embody a particular economic theory.... It is made for people of fundamentally differing views, and the accident of our finding certain opinions natural and familiar or novel and even shocking ought not to conclude our judgment upon the question whether statutes embodying them conflict with the Constitution." Id., at 75-76, 25 S.Ct. 539.
The majority also relies on Justice Harlan's influential dissenting opinion in Poe v. Ullman, 367 U.S. 497, 81 S.Ct. 1752, 6 L.Ed.2d 989 (1961). As the majority recounts, that opinion states that "[d]ue process has not been reduced to any formula." Id., at 542, 81 S.Ct. 1752. But far from conferring the broad interpretive discretion that the majority discerns, Justice Harlan's opinion makes clear that courts implying fundamental rights are not "free to roam where unguided speculation might take them." Ibid. They must instead have "regard to what history teaches" and exercise not only "judgment" but "restraint." Ibid. Of particular relevance, Justice Harlan explained that "laws regarding marriage which provide both when the sexual powers may be used and the legal and societal context in which children are born and brought up ... form a pattern so deeply pressed into the substance of our social life that any Constitutional doctrine in this area must build upon that basis." Id., at 546, 81 S.Ct. 1752.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice SCALIA joins, dissenting.
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice SCALIA and Justice THOMAS join, dissenting.
To prevent five unelected Justices from imposing their personal vision of liberty upon the American people, the Court has held that "liberty" under the Due Process Clause should be understood to protect only those rights that are " 'deeply rooted in this Nation's history and tradition.' " Washington v. Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702, 720-721, 117 S.Ct. 2258, 138 L.Ed.2d 772 (1997). And it is beyond dispute that the right to same-sex marriage is not among those rights. See United States v. Windsor, 570 U.S. ----, ----, 133 S.Ct. 2675, 2714-2715, 186 L.Ed.2d 808 (2013) (ALITO, J., dissenting). Indeed:
Justice ALITO, concurring in the judgment.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice SCALIA, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and Justice THOMAS join, dissenting.
Justice Pariente, joined by two colleagues, dissented from this portion of the court's opinion. She reiterated her view that "Ring requires any fact that qualifies a capital defendant for a sentence of death to be found by a jury." Id., at 450 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part).
Justice BREYER, concurring in the judgment.
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice SOTOMAYOR joins, dissenting.
I readily concede, without embarrassment, that it can sometimes be difficult to draw the line between legislative and judicial power. That should come as no surprise; Chief Justice Marshall's admonition "that 'it is a constitution we are expounding' is especially relevant when the Court is required to give legal sanctions to an underlying principle of the Constitution-that of separation of powers." Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer, 343 U.S. 579, 596-597, 72 S.Ct. 863, 96 L.Ed. 1153 (1952) (Frankfurter, J., concurring) (quoting McCulloch v. Maryland, 4 Wheat. 316, 407, 4 L.Ed. 579 (1819) ). But however difficult it may be to discern the line between the Legislative and Judicial Branches, the entire constitutional enterprise depends on there being such a line. The Court's failure to enforce that boundary in a case as clear as this reduces Article III to a mere "parchment barrier [ ] against the encroaching spirit" of legislative power. The Federalist No. 48, at 308 (J. Madison).
THE CHIEF JUSTICE correctly notes that the Court in Dames & Moore v. Regan, 453 U.S. 654, 661, 101 S.Ct. 2972, 69 L.Ed.2d 918 (1981), urged caution before extending its analysis to "other situations" not presented in that case. Post, at 1337. Much of the Court's cause for concern, however, was the risk that the ruling could be construed as license for the broad exercise of unilateral executive power. See 453 U.S., at 688, 101 S.Ct. 2972 ; American Ins. Assn. v. Garamendi, 539 U.S. 396, 438, 123 S.Ct. 2374, 156 L.Ed.2d 376 (2003) (GINSBURG, J., dissenting). As § 8772 is a law passed by Congress and signed by the President, that risk is nonexistent here.
Readers can judge for themselves how much distance there is between the principal dissent's argument against requiring prisoners to identify an alternative and the view, now announced by Justices BREYER and GINSBURG, that the death penalty is categorically unconstitutional. Post, p. 2759 (BREYER, J., dissenting). The principal dissent goes out of its way to suggest that a State would violate the Eighth Amendment if it used one of the methods of execution employed before the advent of lethal injection. Post, at 2770 - 2772. And the principal dissent makes this suggestion even though the Court held in Wilkerson that this method (the firing squad) is constitutional and even though, in the words of the principal dissent, "there is some reason to think that it is relatively quick and painless." Post, at 2796. Tellingly silent about the methods of execution most commonly used before States switched to lethal injection (the electric chair and gas chamber), the principal dissent implies that it would be unconstitutional to use a method that "could be seen as a devolution to a more primitive era." Ibid. If States cannot return to any of the "more primitive" methods used in the past and if no drug that meets with the principal dissent's approval is available for use in carrying out a death sentence, the logical conclusion is clear. But we have time and again reaffirmed that capital punishment is not per se unconstitutional. See, e.g., Baze, 553 U.S., at 47, 128 S.Ct. 1520; id., at 87-88, 128 S.Ct. 1520 (SCALIA, J., concurring in judgment); Gregg, 428 U.S., at 187, 96 S.Ct. 2909 (joint opinion of Stewart, Powell, and Stevens, JJ.); id., at 226, 96 S.Ct. 2909 (White, J., concurring in judgment); Resweber, 329 U.S., at 464, 67 S.Ct. 374; In re Kemmler, 136 U.S., at 447, 10 S.Ct. 930; Wilkerson, 99 U.S., at 134-135. We decline to effectively overrule these decisions.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, concurring.
The response is also familiar: A vocal minority of the Court, waving over their heads a ream of the most recent abolitionist studies (a superabundant genre) as though they have discovered the lost folios of Shakespeare, insist that now, at long last, the death penalty must be abolished for good. Mind you, not once in the history of the American Republic has this Court ever suggested the death penalty is categorically impermissible. The reason is obvious: It is impossible to hold unconstitutional that which the Constitution explicitly contemplates. The Fifth Amendment provides that "[n]o person shall be held to answer for a capital ... crime, unless on a presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury," and that no person shall be "deprived of life ... without due process of law." Nevertheless, today Justice BREYER takes on the role of the abolitionists in this long-running drama, arguing that the text of the Constitution and two centuries of history must yield to his "20 years of experience on this Court," and inviting full briefing on the continued permissibility of capital punishment, post, at 2781 (dissenting opinion).
Historically, the Eighth Amendment was understood to bar only those punishments that added " 'terror, pain, or disgrace' " to an otherwise permissible capital sentence. Baze v. Rees, 553 U.S. 35, 96, 128 S.Ct. 1520, 170 L.Ed.2d 420 (2008) (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment). Rather than bother with this troubling detail, Justice BREYER elects to contort the constitutional text. Redefining "cruel" to mean "unreliable," "arbitrary," or causing "excessive delays," and "unusual" to include a "decline in use," he proceeds to offer up a white paper devoid of any meaningful legal argument.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice SCALIA joins, concurring.
It should come as no surprise, then, that the primary explanation a regression analysis revealed for the gap between the egregiousness scores and the actual sentences was not the race or sex of the offender or victim, but the locality in which the crime was committed. Donohue, supra, at 640; see also post, at 2761 (BREYER, J., dissenting). What is more surprising is that Justice BREYER considers this factor to be evidence of arbitrariness. See ibid. The constitutional provisions just quoted, which place such decisions in the hands of jurors and trial courts located where "the crime shall have been committed," seem deliberately designed to introduce that factor.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins, dissenting.
The Court has consequently sought to make the application of the death penalty less arbitrary by restricting its use to those whom Justice Souter called " 'the worst of the worst.' " Kansas v. Marsh, 548 U.S., at 206, 126 S.Ct. 2516 (dissenting opinion); see also Roper v. Simmons, 543 U.S. 551, 568, 125 S.Ct. 1183, 161 L.Ed.2d 1 (2005) ("Capital punishment must be limited to those offenders who commit a narrow category of the most serious crimes and whose extreme culpability makes them the most deserving of execution" (internal quotation marks omitted)); Kennedy v. Louisiana, 554 U.S. 407, 420, 128 S.Ct. 2641, 171 L.Ed.2d 525 (2008) (citing Roper, supra, at 568, 125 S.Ct. 1183).
Justice THOMAS catalogues the tragic details of various capital cases, ante, at 2752 - 2755 (concurring opinion), but this misses my point. Every murder is tragic, but unless we return to the mandatory death penalty struck down in Woodson, 428 U.S., at 304-305, 96 S.Ct. 2978, the constitutionality of capital punishment rests on its limited application to the worst of the worst, supra, at 2759 - 2760. And this extensive body of evidence suggests that it is not so limited.
Turning to the first constitutional difficulty, nearly all death penalty States keep death row inmates in isolation for 22 or more hours per day. American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), A Death Before Dying: Solitary Confinement on Death Row 5 (July 2013) (ACLU Report). This occurs even though the ABA has suggested that death row inmates be housed in conditions similar to the general population, and the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture has called for a global ban on solitary confinement longer than 15 days. See id., at 2, 4; ABA Standards for Criminal Justice: Treatment of Prisoners 6 (3d ed. 2011). And it is well documented that such prolonged solitary confinement produces numerous deleterious harms. See, e.g., Haney, Mental Health Issues in Long-Term Solitary and "Supermax" Confinement, 49 Crime & Delinquency 124, 130 (2003) (cataloguing studies finding that solitary confinement can cause prisoners to experience "anxiety, panic, rage, loss of control, paranoia, hallucinations, and self-mutilations," among many other symptoms); Grassian, Psychiatric Effects of Solitary Confinement, 22 Wash U. J. L. & Policy 325, 331 (2006) ("[E]ven a few days of solitary confinement will predictably shift the [brain's] electroencephalogram (EEG) pattern toward an abnormal pattern characteristic of stupor and delirium"); accord, In re Medley, 134 U.S. 160, 167-168, 10 S.Ct. 384, 33 L.Ed. 835 (1890); see also Davis v. Ayala, --- U.S. ----, 135 S.Ct. 2187, --- L.Ed.2d ---- (2015) (KENNEDY, J., concurring).
Others have written at great length about the constitutional problems that delays create, and, rather than repeat their facts, arguments, and conclusions, I simply refer to some of their writings. See, e.g., Johnson, 558 U.S., at 1069, 130 S.Ct. 541 (statement of Stevens, J.) (delay "subjects death row inmates to decades of especially severe, dehumanizing conditions of confinement"); Furman, 408 U.S., at 288, 92 S.Ct. 2726 (Brennan, J., concurring) ("long wait between the imposition of sentence and the actual infliction of death" is "inevitable" and often "exacts a frightful toll"); Solesbee v. Balkcom, 339 U.S. 9, 14, 70 S.Ct. 457, 94 L.Ed. 604 (1950) (Frankfurter, J., dissenting) ("In the history of murder, the onset of insanity while awaiting execution of a death sentence is not a rare phenomenon"); People v. Anderson, 6 Cal.3d 628, 649, 493 P.2d 880, 894 (1972) (collecting sources) ("[C]ruelty of capital punishment lies not only in the execution itself and the pain incident thereto, but also in the dehumanizing effects of the lengthy imprisonment prior to execution during which the judicial and administrative procedures essential to due process of law are carried out" (footnote omitted)); District Attorney for Suffolk Dist. v. Watson, 381 Mass. 648, 673, 411 N.E.2d 1274, 1287 (1980) (Braucher, J., concurring) (death penalty unconstitutional under State Constitution in part because "[it] will be carried out only after agonizing months and years of uncertainty"); see also Riley v. Attorney General of Jamaica, [1983] 1 A.C. 719, 734-735 (P.C. 1982) (Lord Scarman, joined by Lord Brightman, dissenting) ("execution after inordinate delay" would infringe prohibition against "cruel and unusual punishments" in § 10 of the "Bill of Rights of 1689," the precursor to our Eighth Amendment); Pratt v. Attorney Gen. of Jamaica, [1994] 2 A.C. 1, 4 (P.C. 1993); id., at 32-33 (collecting cases finding inordinate delays unconstitutional or the equivalent); State v. Makwanyane 1995 (3) SA391 (CC) (S. Afr.); Catholic Commission for Justice & Peace in Zimbabwe v. Attorney-General, [1993] 1 Zim. L. R. 242, 282 (inordinate delays unconstitutional); Soering v. United Kingdom, 11 Eur. Ct. H. R. (ser. A), p. 439 (1989) (extradition of murder suspect to United States would violate the European Convention on Human Rights in light of risk of delay before execution); United States v. Burns, [2001] 1 S.C.R. 283, 353, ¶ 123 (similar).
Indeed, Justice Lewis Powell (who provided a crucial vote in Gregg ) came to much the same conclusion, albeit after his retirement from this Court. Justice Powell had come to the Court convinced that the Federal Constitution did not outlaw the death penalty but rather left the matter up to individual States to determine. Furman, supra, at 431-432, 92 S.Ct. 2726 (Powell, J., dissenting); see also J. Jeffries, Justice Lewis F. Powell, Jr., p. 409 (2001) (describing Powell, during his time on the Court, as a "fervent partisan" of "the constitutionality of capital punishment").
In sum, if we look to States, in more than 60% there is effectively no death penalty, in an additional 18% an execution is rare and unusual, and 6%, i.e., three States, account for 80% of all executions. If we look to population, about 66% of the Nation lives in a State that has not carried out an execution in the last three years. And if we look to counties, in 86% there is effectively no death penalty. It seems fair to say that it is now unusual to find capital punishment in the United States, at least when we consider the Nation as a whole. See Furman, 408 U.S., at 311, 92 S.Ct. 2726 (1972) (White, J., concurring) (executions could be so infrequently carried out that they "would cease to be a credible deterrent or measurably to contribute to any other end of punishment in the criminal justice system ... when imposition of the penalty reaches a certain degree of infrequency, it would be very doubtful that any existing general need for retribution would be measurably satisfied").
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice BREYER, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Baze held no such thing. In the first place, the Court cites only the plurality opinion in Baze as support for its known-and-available-alternative requirement. See ibid. Even assuming that the Baze plurality set forth such a requirement-which it did not-none of the Members of the Court whose concurrences were necessary to sustain the Baze Court's judgment articulated a similar view. See 553 U.S., at 71-77, 87, 128 S.Ct. 1520 (Stevens, J., concurring in judgment); id., at 94, 99-107, 128 S.Ct. 1520 (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment); id., at 107-108, 113, 128 S.Ct. 1520 (BREYER, J., concurring in judgment). In general, "the holding of the Court may be viewed as that position taken by those Members who concurred in the judgments on the narrowest grounds." Marks v. United States, 430 U.S. 188, 193, 97 S.Ct. 990, 51 L.Ed.2d 260 (1977) (internal quotation marks omitted). And as the Court observes, ante, at 2738, n. 2, the opinion of Justice THOMAS, joined by Justice SCALIA, took the broadest position with respect to the degree of intent that state officials must have in order to have violated the Eighth Amendment, concluding that only a method of execution deliberately designed to inflict pain, and not one simply designed with deliberate indifference to the risk of severe pain, would be unconstitutional. 553 U.S., at 94, 128 S.Ct. 1520 (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment). But this understanding of the Eighth Amendment's intent requirement is unrelated to, and thus not any broader or narrower than, the requirement the Court now divines from Baze. Because the position that a plaintiff challenging a method of execution under the Eighth Amendment must prove the availability of an alternative means of execution did not "represent the views of a majority of the Court," it was not the holding of the Baze Court. CTS Corp. v. Dynamics Corp. of America, 481 U.S. 69, 81, 107 S.Ct. 1637, 95 L.Ed.2d 67 (1987).
2 Justice SOTOMAYOR's dissent (hereinafter principal dissent), post, at 2793 - 2794, inexplicably refuses to recognize that THE CHIEF JUSTICE's opinion in Baze sets out the holding of the case. In Baze, the opinion of THE CHIEF JUSTICE was joined by two other Justices. Justices SCALIA and THOMAS took the broader position that a method of execution is consistent with the Eighth Amendment unless it is deliberately designed to inflict pain. 553 U.S., at 94, 128 S.Ct. 1520 (THOMAS, J. concurring in judgment). Thus, as explained in Marks v. United States, 430 U.S. 188, 193, 97 S.Ct. 990, 51 L.Ed.2d 260 (1977), THE CHIEF JUSTICE's opinion sets out the holding of the case. It is for this reason that petitioners base their argument on the rule set out in that opinion. See Brief for Petitioners 25, 28.
1 Generally: Baze v. Rees, 553 U.S. 35, 94-97, 128 S.Ct. 1520, 170 L.Ed.2d 420 (2008) (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment) (explaining that the Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause does not prohibit the death penalty, but only torturous punishments); Graham v. Collins, 506 U.S. 461, 488, 113 S.Ct. 892, 122 L.Ed.2d 260 (1993) (THOMAS, J., concurring); Gardner v. Florida, 430 U.S. 349, 371, 97 S.Ct. 1197, 51 L.Ed.2d 393 (1977) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting) ("The prohibition of the Eighth Amendment relates to the character of the punishment, and not to the process by which it is imposed"). On reliability: Kansas v. Marsh, 548 U.S. 163, 181, 126 S.Ct. 2516, 165 L.Ed.2d 429 (2006) (noting that the death penalty remains constitutional despite imperfections in the criminal justice system); McGautha v. California, 402 U.S. 183, 221, 91 S.Ct. 1454, 28 L.Ed.2d 711 (1971) ("[T]he Federal Constitution, which marks the limits of our authority in these cases, does not guarantee trial procedures that are the best of all worlds, or that accord with the most enlightened ideas of students of the infant science of criminology, or even those that measure up to the individual predilections of members of this Court"). On arbitrariness: Ring v. Arizona, 536 U.S. 584, 610, 122 S.Ct. 2428, 153 L.Ed.2d 556 (2002) (SCALIA, J., concurring) (explaining that what compelled States to specify " 'aggravating factors' " designed to limit the death penalty to the worst of the worst was this Court's baseless jurisprudence concerning juror discretion); McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U.S. 279, 308-312, 107 S.Ct. 1756, 95 L.Ed.2d 262 (1987) (noting that various procedures, including the right to a jury trial, constitute a defendant's protection against arbitrariness in the application of the death penalty). On excessive delays: Knight v. Florida, 528 U.S. 990, 120 S.Ct. 459, 145 L.Ed.2d 370 (1999) (THOMAS, J., concurring in denial of certiorari) ("I am unaware of any support in the American constitutional tradition or in this Court's precedent for the proposition that a defendant can avail himself of the panoply of appellate and collateral procedures and then complain when his execution is delayed"); see also Johnson v. Bredesen, 558 U.S. 1067, 1070, 130 S.Ct. 541, 175 L.Ed.2d 552 (2009) (THOMAS, J., concurring in denial of certiorari). And on the decline in use of the death penalty: Atkins v. Virginia, 536 U.S. 304, 345, 122 S.Ct. 2242, 153 L.Ed.2d 335 (2002) (SCALIA, J., dissenting); Woodson v. North Carolina, 428 U.S. 280, 308-310, 96 S.Ct. 2978, 49 L.Ed.2d 944 (1976) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting).
4 Justice BREYER appears to acknowledge that our decision holding mandatory death penalty schemes unconstitutional, Woodson v. North Carolina, 428 U.S. 280, 96 S.Ct. 2978, 49 L.Ed.2d 944 (1976) (plurality opinion), may have introduced the problem of arbitrary application. Post, at 2762. I agree that Woodson eliminated one reliable legislative response to concerns about arbitrariness. Graham v. Collins, 506 U.S. 461, 486, 113 S.Ct. 892, 122 L.Ed.2d 260 (1993) (THOMAS, J., concurring). Because that decision was also questionable on constitutional grounds, id., at 486-488, 113 S.Ct. 892, I would be willing to revisit it in a future case.
Justice ALITO, concurring in the judgment.
In restricting the relitigation of previously rejected claims, Georgia is not alone. "[W]e have long and consistently affirmed that a collateral challenge may not do service for an appeal." United States v. Frady, 456 U.S. 152, 165, 102 S.Ct. 1584, 71 L.Ed.2d 816 (1982). Accordingly, at least as a general rule, federal prisoners may not use a motion under 28 U.S.C. § 2255 to relitigate a claim that was previously rejected on direct appeal. See, e.g., Reed v. Farley, 512 U.S. 339, 358, 114 S.Ct. 2291, 129 L.Ed.2d 277 (1994) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) ("[C]laims will ordinarily not be entertained under § 2255 that have already been rejected on direct review"); Withrow v. Williams, 507 U.S. 680, 721, 113 S.Ct. 1745, 123 L.Ed.2d 407 (1993) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part) ("[A]bsent countervailing considerations, district courts may refuse to reach the merits of a constitutional claim previously raised and rejected on direct appeal"); United States v. Lee, 715 F.3d 215, 224 (C.A.8 2013) ; Rozier v. United States, 701 F.3d 681, 684 (C.A.11 2012) ; United States v. Roane, 378 F.3d 382, 396, n. 7 (C.A.4 2004) ; United States v. Webster, 392 F.3d 787, 791 (C.A.5 2004) ; White v. United States, 371 F.3d 900, 902 (C.A.7 2004) ; United States v. Jones, 918 F.2d 9, 10-11 (C.A.2 1990) ; United States v. Prichard, 875 F.2d 789, 790-791 (C.A.10 1989). Cf. Davis v. United States, 417 U.S. 333, 342, 94 S.Ct. 2298, 41 L.Ed.2d 109 (1974). As we have said, "[i]t has, of course, long been settled law that an error that may justify reversal on direct appeal will not necessarily support a collateral attack on a final judgment. The reasons for narrowly limiting the grounds for collateral attack on final judgments are well known and basic to our adversary system of justice." United States v. Addonizio, 442 U.S. 178, 184, 99 S.Ct. 2235, 60 L.Ed.2d 805 (1979) (footnote omitted).
Justice KAGAN, with whom Justice BREYER joins, dissenting.
Taken for all it is worth, that statutory grant could extend FERC's power to some surprising places. As the court below noted, markets in all electricity's inputs-steel, fuel, and labor most prominent among them-might affect generators' supply of power. See 753 F.3d, at 221 ; id., at 235 (Edwards, J., dissenting). And for that matter, markets in just about everything-the whole economy, as it were-might influence LSEs' demand. So if indirect or tangential impacts on wholesale electricity rates sufficed, FERC could regulate now in one industry, now in another, changing a vast array of rules and practices to implement its vision of reasonableness and justice. We cannot imagine that was what Congress had in mind.
Justice SCALIA, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment.
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice SCALIA and Justice ALITO join, dissenting.
In addition to California v. San Pablo & Tulare R. Co., 149 U.S. 308, 13 S.Ct. 876, 37 L.Ed. 747 (1893), THE CHIEF JUSTICE maintains, two recent decisions of the Court support its position: Alvarez v. Smith, 558 U.S. 87, 130 S.Ct. 576, 175 L.Ed.2d 447 (2009), and Already, LLC v. Nike, Inc., 568 U.S. ----, 133 S.Ct. 721, 184 L.Ed.2d 553 (2013). See post, at 680 - 682 (dissenting opinion). The Court's reasoning in those opinions, however, is consistent with our decision in this case. In Alvarez, the Court found moot claims for injunctive and declaratory relief in relation to cars and cash seized by the police. Through separate state-court proceedings, the State had "returned all the cars that it seized," and the plaintiff-property owners had "either forfeited any relevant cash or ha[d] accepted as final the State's return of some of it." 558 U.S., at 89, 95-96, 130 S.Ct. 576. Alvarez thus resembles the railroad tax cases described above: The Alvarez plaintiffs had in fact received all the relief they could claim, all "underlying property disputes" had ended, id., at 89, 130 S.Ct. 576 and as the complaint sought "only declaratory and injunctive relief, not damages," id., at 92, 130 S.Ct. 576 no continuing controversy remained.
While outright payment is the surest way for a defendant to make the requisite mootness showing, I would not foreclose other means of doing so. The question is whether it is certain the defendant will pay, not whether the defendant has already paid. I believe Campbell clears the mark in this case. As THE CHIEF JUSTICE observes, there is no dispute Campbell has the means to pay the few thousand dollars it offered Gomez, and there is no basis "to argue that Campbell might not make good on that promise" if the case were dismissed. Ante, at 680. Thus, in the circumstances of this case, Campbell's offer of complete relief should have rendered Gomez's damages claim moot. But the same would not necessarily be true for other defendants, particularly those that face more substantial claims, possess less secure finances, or extend offers of questionable sincerity. Cf. Already, 568 U.S., at ---- - ----, 133 S.Ct., at 734 (KENNEDY, J., concurring) (emphasizing the "formidable burden on the party asserting mootness" and noting possible "doubts that Nike's showing [of mootness] would suffice in other circumstances").
Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment, would decide the case based on whether there was a formal tender under the common law. This suffers from the same flaw as the majority opinion. The question is not whether the requirements of the common law of tender have been met, but whether there is a case or controversy for purposes of Article III. The Supreme Court cases we have discussed make clear that the two questions are not the same. To cite just one example, Justice THOMAS argues that a tender under the common law must include an admission of liability. Ante, at 674 -675. Our precedents, however, plainly establish that an admission of liability is not required for a case to be moot under Article III. See supra, at 669 - 670. We are not at liberty to proceed as if those Article III precedents do not exist.
Justice ALITO, concurring in the judgment.
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment.
None of the Reconstruction Amendments changed the original understanding of republican government. Those Amendments brought blacks within the existing American political community. The Fourteenth Amendment pressured States to adopt universal male suffrage by reducing a noncomplying State's representation in Congress. Amdt. 14, § 2. And the Fifteenth Amendment prohibited restricting the right of suffrage based on race. Amdt. 15, § 1. That is as far as those Amendments went. As Justice Harlan explained in Reynolds, neither Amendment provides a theory of how much "weight" a vote must receive, nor do they require a State to apportion both Houses of their legislature solely on a population basis. See 377 U.S., at 595-608, 84 S.Ct. 1362(dissenting opinion). And Justice ALITO quite convincingly demonstrates why the majority errs by reading a theory of equal representation into the apportionment provision in § 2 of the Fourteenth Amendment. See post, at 1146 - 1149 (opinion concurring in judgment).
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice THOMASjoins except as to Part III-B, concurring in the judgment.
Justice ALITO observes that Hamilton stated this principle while opposing allocation of an equal number of Senate seats to each State. Post, at 1136 - 1137 (opinion concurring in judgment). That context, however, does not diminish Hamilton's principled argument for allocating seats to protect the representational rights of "every individual of the community at large." 1 Records of the Federal Convention of 1787, p. 473 (M. Farrand ed. 1911). Justice ALITO goes on to quote James Madison for the proposition that Hamilton was concerned, simply and only, with "the outcome of a contest over raw political power." Post, at 1146. Notably, in the statement Justice ALITO quotes, Madison was not attributing that motive to Hamilton; instead, according to Madison, Hamilton was attributing that motive to the advocates of equal representation for States. Farrand, supra, at 466. One need not gainsay that Hamilton's backdrop was the political controversies of his day. That reality, however, has not deterred this Court's past reliance on his statements of principle. See, e.g., Printz v. United States, 521 U.S. 898, 910-924, 117 S.Ct. 2365, 138 L.Ed.2d 914 (1997).
As Justice THOMAS notes, ante, at 1137 - 1138 (opinion concurring in judgment), the plan for the House of Representatives was based in large part on the view that there should be "equality of representation," but that does not answer the question whether it is eligible voters (as appellants urge), all citizens, or all residents who should be equally represented. The Constitution allocates House seats based on total inhabitants, but as I explain, the dominant, if not exclusive, reason for that choice was the allocation of political power among the States.
The Court now reads Albright to mean that a Fourth Amendment seizure continues "after the start of 'legal process," but three forms of what might be termed "legal process" were issued in Albright : the arrest warrant, the order releasing him on bond after his first appearance, and the order holding him over for trial after the preliminary examination. I agree that Albright's seizure did not end with the issuance of the warrant (that would be ridiculous since he had not even been arrested at that point) or the first appearance, see ante, at 918 - 919, and n. 6, but it is impossible to read anything more into the holding in Albright . The terse plurality opinion joined by four Justices said no more; the opinion of Justice Scalia, who joined the plurality opinion, referred only to Albright's "arrest," 510 U.S., at 275, 114 S.Ct. 807 (concurring opinion); and Justices KENNEDY and THOMAS, who concurred in the judgment, did so only because Albright's "allegation of arrest without probable cause must be analyzed under the Fourth Amendment." Id ., at 281, 114 S.Ct. 807 (KENNEDY, J., concurring in the judgment). To read anything more into Albright is to adopt the position taken by just one Member of the plurality, see id., at 279, 114 S.Ct. 807 (GINSBURG, J., concurring) (seizure continues throughout the period of pretrial detention), and the two Justices in dissent, see id ., at 307, 114 S.Ct. 807 (Stevens, J., dissenting) (same).
This Court decided some four decades ago that a claim challenging pretrial detention fell within the scope of the Fourth Amendment. In Gerstein, two persons arrested without a warrant brought a § 1983 suit complaining that they had been held in custody for "a substantial period solely on the decision of a prosecutor." 420 U.S., at 106, 95 S.Ct. 854. The Court looked to the Fourth Amendment to analyze-and uphold-their claim that such a pretrial restraint on liberty is unlawful unless a judge (or grand jury) first makes a reliable finding of probable cause. See id., at 114, 117, n. 19, 95 S.Ct. 854. The Fourth Amendment, we began, establishes the minimum constitutional "standards and procedures" not just for arrest but also for ensuing "detention." Id., at 111, 95 S.Ct. 854. In choosing that Amendment "as the rationale for decision," the Court responded to a concurring Justice's view that the Due Process Clause offered the better framework: The Fourth Amendment, the majority countered, was "tailored explicitly for the criminal justice system, and it[ ] always has been thought to define" the appropriate process "for seizures of person[s] ... in criminal cases, including the detention of suspects pending trial." Id., at 125, n. 27, 95 S.Ct. 854. That Amendment, standing alone, guaranteed "a fair and reliable determination of probable cause as a condition for any significant pretrial restraint." Id., at 125, 95 S.Ct. 854. Accordingly, those detained prior to trial without such a finding could appeal to "the Fourth Amendment's protection against unfounded invasions of liberty." Id., at 112, 95 S.Ct. 854 ; see id., at 114, 95 S.Ct. 854.
And so too, a later decision indicates, those objecting to a pretrial deprivation of liberty may invoke the Fourth Amendment when (as here) that deprivation occurs after legal process commences. The § 1983 plaintiff in Albright complained of various pretrial restraints imposed after a court found probable cause to issue an arrest warrant, and then bind him over for trial, based on a policeman's unfounded charges. See 510 U.S., at 268-269, 114 S.Ct. 807 (plurality opinion). For uncertain reasons, Albright ignored the Fourth Amendment in drafting his complaint; instead, he alleged that the defendant officer had infringed his substantive due process rights. This Court rejected that claim, with five Justices in two opinions remitting Albright to the Fourth Amendment. See id., at 271, 114 S.Ct. 807 (plurality opinion) ("We hold that it is the Fourth Amendment ... under which [his] claim must be judged"); id., at 290, 114 S.Ct. 807 (Souter, J., concurring in judgment) ("[I]njuries like those [he] alleges are cognizable in § 1983 claims founded upon ... the Fourth Amendment"). "The Framers," the plurality wrote, "considered the matter of pretrial deprivations of liberty and drafted the Fourth Amendment to address it." Id., at 274, 114 S.Ct. 807. That the deprivations at issue were pursuant to legal process made no difference, given that they were (allegedly) unsupported by probable cause; indeed, neither of the two opinions so much as mentioned that procedural circumstance. Relying on Gerstein, the plurality stated that the Fourth Amendment remained the "relevan[t]" constitutional provision to assess the "deprivations of liberty"-most notably, pretrial detention-"that go hand in hand with criminal prosecutions." 510 U.S., at 274, 114 S.Ct. 807 ; see id., at 290, 114 S.Ct. 807 (Souter, J., concurring in judgment) ("[R]ules of recovery for such harms have naturally coalesced under the Fourth Amendment").
The Court repeated the same idea in a follow-on decision to Gerstein. In County of Riverside v. McLaughlin, 500 U.S. 44, 47, 111 S.Ct. 1661, 114 L.Ed.2d 49 (1991), we considered how quickly a jurisdiction must provide the probable-cause determination that Gerstein demanded "as a prerequisite to an extended pretrial detention." In holding that the decision should occur within 48 hours of an arrest, the majority understood its "task [as] articulat[ing] more clearly the boundaries of what is permissible under the Fourth Amendment." 500 U.S., at 56, 111 S.Ct. 1661. In arguing for still greater speed, the principal dissent invoked the original meaning of "the Fourth Amendment's prohibition of 'unreasonable seizures,' insofar as it applies to seizure of the person." Id., at 60, 111 S.Ct. 1661 (Scalia, J., dissenting). The difference between the two opinions was significant, but the commonality still more so: All Justices agreed that the Fourth Amendment provides the appropriate lens through which to view a claim involving pretrial detention.
The majority contends that "[t]he fact that race consciousness played a role in only a small portion of admissions decisions should be a hallmark of narrow tailoring, not evidence of unconstitutionality." Ante, at 2212. This argument directly contradicts this Court's precedent. Because racial classifications are " 'a highly suspect tool,' " Grutter, 539 U.S., at 326, 123 S.Ct. 2325 they should be employed only "as a last resort," Croson, 488 U.S., at 519, 109 S.Ct. 706 (opinion of KENNEDY, J.); see also Grutter, supra, at 342, 123 S.Ct. 2325 ("[R]acial classifications, however compelling their goals, are potentially so dangerous that they may be employed no more broadly than the interest demands"). Where, as here, racial preferences have only a slight impact on minority enrollment, a race-neutral alternative likely could have reached the same result. See Parents Involved, 551 U.S., at 733-734, 127 S.Ct. 2738 (holding that the "minimal effect" of school districts' racial classifications "casts doubt on the necessity of using [such] classifications" and "suggests that other means [of achieving their objectives] would be effective"). As Justice KENNEDY once aptly put it, "the small number of [students] affected suggests that the schoo[l] could have achieved [its] stated ends through different means." Id., at 790, 127 S.Ct. 2738 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment). And in this case, a race-neutral alternative could accomplish UT's objectives without gratuitously branding the covers of tens of thousands of applications with a bare racial stamp and "tell[ing] each student he or she is to be defined by race." Id., at 789, 127 S.Ct. 2738.
See ante, at 2209 ("Fisher I clarified the stringency of the strict-scrutiny burden for a school that employs race-conscious review"); 758 F.3d, at 642 ("Bringing forward Justice Kennedy's dissent in Grutter, the Supreme Court faulted the district court's and this Court's review of UT Austin's means to achieve the permissible goal of diversity"); id., at 665, n. 5 (Garza, J., dissenting) ("I agree with the majority that Fisher represents a decisive shift in the law").
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice ALITO, Justice KAGAN, and Justice GORSUCH join, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice KENNEDY and Justice ALITO join, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
The Court has looked to Justice Harlan's concurring opinion in Welsh v.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice ALITO joins, concurring in the judgment in part.
After silently following the path Justice Harlan charted in Welsh v. United States, 398 U.S. 333, 90 S.Ct. 1792, 26 L.Ed.2d 308 (1970), in several cases involving gender-based discrimination, see, e.g.,Wiesenfeld, 420 U.S., at 642, 653, 95 S.Ct. 1225 (extending benefits); Frontiero v. Richardson, 411 U.S. 677, 690-691, and n. 25, 93 S.Ct. 1764, 36 L.Ed.2d 583 (1973) ( plurality opinion) (same), the Court unanimously adopted his formulation in Califano v. Westcott, 443 U.S. 76, 99 S.Ct. 2655, 61 L.Ed.2d 382 (1979). See id., at 89-90, 99 S.Ct. 2655 (opinion for the Court); id., at 94-95, 99 S.Ct. 2655 (Powell, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). The appropriate remedy, the Westcott majority held, was extension to unemployed mothers of federal family-aid unemployment benefits provided by statute only for families of unemployed fathers. Id., at 90-93, 99 S.Ct. 2655. In the dissent's view, nullification was the proper course. Id., at 94-96, 99 S.Ct. 2655.
Justice ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and Justice THOMAS join, concurring in the judgment.
1. In 1882 Congress enacted two laws that restricted immigration: The first prohibited the entry of "Chinese laborers." The Chinese Exclusion Act, ch. 126, 22 Stat. 58. The second prohibited the entry of "any convict, lunatic, idiot, or any person unable to take care of himself or herself without becoming a public charge." Act of Aug. 3, 1882, 22 Stat. 214. Neither said a word about bail. But in one instance, an excluded Chinese woman was detained in jail in San Francisco pending her return to China. She sought bail. In re Ah Moy, 21 F. 808 (C.C.D.Cal.1884). Justice Field, sitting as a Circuit Judge, wrote that the court lacked the authority to order bail because doing so would allow her to enter the United States-just what the statute forbade. Id., at 809. The other sitting Circuit Judge (Judge Sawyer) disagreed. Id., at 810 (dissenting opinion). He pointed out that the alien would remain "in the custody and control of the law while lawfully on bail." Ibid. He added that it "would be a great hardship, not to say a gross violation of her personal rights," to refuse bail for 15 days before her ship arrived as long as she could provide "security satisfactory to the court" that she would indeed depart when it did. Id., at 809-810. Two other Circuit Judges noted their agreement with Judge Sawyer. Id., at 809, n. 1. But they did not participate in the case, ibid., the two participating judges split 1 to 1, and so the views of presiding Justice Field prevailed. The alien appealed to this Court, Cheong Ah Moy v. United States, 113 U.S. 216, 5 S.Ct. 431, 28 L.Ed. 983 (1885), but before this Court could decide, the ship departed with Cheong Ah Moy aboard.
The Court then found detention constitutional "during the limited period" necessary to arrange for removal, and we contrasted that period of detention with the detention at issue in Zadvydas, referring to the detention in Demore as being "of a much shorter duration." 538 U.S., at 526, 528, 123 S.Ct. 1708. Justice KENNEDY stated in a concurrence that the Due Process Clause might require bail hearings "if the continued detention became unreasonable or unjustified." Id., at 532, 123 S.Ct. 1708. Dissenting, I wrote that, had I believed that Demore "had conceded that he [was] deportable," then, despite Zadvydas, "I would conclude that the Government could detain him without bail for the few weeks ordinarily necessary for formal entry of a removal order." 538 U.S., at 576, 123 S.Ct. 1708 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part).
I take no position on whether some of the respondents will face other jurisdictional hurdles, even on review of their final removal orders. See, e.g., §§ 1252(a)(2)(A), (B). I also continue to agree with Justice O'Connor's concurring opinion in Demore v. Kim, 538 U.S. 510, 123 S.Ct. 1708, 155 L.Ed.2d 724 (2003), which explained that § 1226(e)"unequivocally deprives federal courts of jurisdiction to set aside 'any action or decision' by the Attorney General" regarding detention. Id., at 533, 123 S.Ct. 1708 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment).
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins, dissenting.
The familiar procedural due process inspection instructed by Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319, 96 S.Ct. 893, 47 L.Ed.2d 18 (1976), governs these cases. Colorado argues that we should instead apply the standard from Medina v. California, 505 U.S. 437, 445, 112 S.Ct. 2572, 120 L.Ed.2d 353 (1992), and inquire whether Nelson and Madden were exposed to a procedure offensive to a fundamental principle of justice. Medina "provide[s] the appropriate framework for assessing the validity of state procedural rules" that "are part of the criminal process." Id., at 443, 112 S.Ct. 2572. Such rules concern, for example, the allocation of burdens of proof and the type of evidence qualifying as admissible. These cases, in contrast, concern the continuing deprivation of property after a conviction has been reversed or vacated, with no prospect of reprosecution. See Kaley v. United States, 571 U.S. ----, ----, n. 4, 134 S.Ct. 1090, 1110 n. 4, 188 L.Ed.2d 46 (2014) (ROBERTS, C.J., dissenting) (explaining the different offices of Mathews and Medina ). Because no further criminal process is implicated, Mathews "provides the relevant inquiry." 571 U.S., at ---- n. 4, 134 S.Ct., at 1110 n. 4.
Justice ALITO, concurring in the judgment.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins, dissenting.
I shall explain why I believe this suit falls well within the scope of traditional constitutional tort law and why I cannot agree with the Court's arguments to the contrary. I recognize, and write separately about, the strongest of the Court's arguments, namely, the fact that plaintiffs' claims concern detention that took place soon after a serious attack on the United States and some of them concern actions of high-level Government officials. While these facts may affect the substantive constitutional questions (e.g., were any of the conditions "legitimate"?) or the scope of the qualified-immunity defense, they do not extinguish the Bivens action itself. If I may paraphrase Justice Harlan, concurring in Bivens : In wartime as well as in peacetime, "it is important, in a civilized society, that the judicial branch of the Nation's government stand ready to afford a remedy" "for the most flagrant and patently unjustified," unconstitutional "abuses of official power." 403 U.S., at 410-411, 91 S.Ct. 1999 (opinion concurring in judgment); cf. Boumediene v. Bush, 553 U.S. 723, 798, 128 S.Ct. 2229, 171 L.Ed.2d 41 (2008).
For one thing, a Bivens action comes accompanied by many legal safeguards designed to prevent the courts from interfering with Executive and Legislative Branch activity reasonably believed to be necessary to protect national security. In Justice Jackson's well-known words, the Constitution is not "a suicide pact." Terminiello v. Chicago, 337 U.S. 1, 37, 69 S.Ct. 894, 93 L.Ed. 1131 (1949) (dissenting opinion). The Constitution itself takes account of public necessity. Thus, for example, the Fourth Amendment does not forbid all Government searches and seizures; it forbids only those that are "unreasonable." Ordinarily, it requires that a police officer obtain a search warrant before entering an apartment, but should the officer observe a woman being dragged against her will into that apartment, he should, and will, act at once. The Fourth Amendment makes allowances for such "exigent circumstances." Brigham City v. Stuart, 547 U.S. 398, 401, 126 S.Ct. 1943, 164 L.Ed.2d 650 (2006) (warrantless entry justified to forestall imminent injury). Similarly, the Fifth Amendment bars only conditions of confinement that are not "reasonably related to a legitimate governmental objective." Bell v. Wolfish, 441 U.S., at 539, 99 S.Ct. 1861. What is unreasonable and illegitimate in time of peace may be reasonable and legitimate in time of war.
At the same time, there may well be a particular need for Bivens remedies when security-related Government actions are at issue. History tells us of far too many instances where the Executive or Legislative Branch took actions during time of war that, on later examination, turned out unnecessarily and unreasonably to have deprived American citizens of basic constitutional rights. We have read about the Alien and Sedition Acts, the thousands of civilians imprisoned during the Civil War, and the suppression of civil liberties during World War I. See W. Rehnquist, All the Laws but One: Civil Liberties in Wartime 209-210, 49-50, 173-180, 183 (1998); see also Ex parte Milligan, 4 Wall. 2, 18 L.Ed. 281 (1866) (decided after the Civil War was over). The pages of the U.S. Reports themselves recite this Court's refusal to set aside the Government's World War II action removing more than 70,000 American citizens of Japanese origin from their west coast homes and interning them in camps, see Korematsu v. United States, 323 U.S. 214, 65 S.Ct. 193, 89 L.Ed. 194 (1944) -an action that at least some officials knew at the time was unnecessary, see id., at 233-242, 65 S.Ct. 193 (Murphy, J., dissenting); P. Irons, Justice at War 202-204, 288 (1983). President Franklin Roosevelt's Attorney General, perhaps exaggerating, once said that "[t]he Constitution has not greatly bothered any wartime President." Rehnquist, supra, at 191.
Can we, in respect to actions taken during those periods, rely exclusively, as the Court seems to suggest, upon injunctive remedies or writs of habeas corpus, their retail equivalent? Complaints seeking that kind of relief typically come during the emergency itself, when emotions are strong, when courts may have too little or inaccurate information, and when courts may well prove particularly reluctant to interfere with even the least well-founded Executive Branch activity. That reluctance may itself set an unfortunate precedent, which, as Justice Jackson pointed out, can "li[e] about like a loaded weapon" awaiting discharge in another case. Korematsu, supra, at 246, 65 S.Ct. 193 (dissenting opinion).
The Second Circuit did not identify anything in § 1964(c)that shows that the statute reaches foreign injuries. Instead, the court reasoned that § 1964(c)'s extraterritorial effect flows directly from that of § 1962. Citing our holding in Sedima, S.P.R.L. v. Imrex Co., 473 U.S. 479, 105 S.Ct. 3275, 87 L.Ed.2d 346 (1985), that the "compensable injury" addressed by § 1964(c)"necessarily is the harm caused by predicate acts sufficiently related to constitute a pattern," id., at 497, 105 S.Ct. 3275the Court of Appeals held that a RICO plaintiff may sue for foreign injury that was caused by the violation of a predicate statute that applies extraterritorially, just as a substantive RICO violation may be based on extraterritorial predicates. 764 F.3d, at 151. Justice GINSBURG advances the same theory. See post, at 2113 - 2114 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). This reasoning has surface appeal, but it fails to appreciate that the presumption against extraterritoriality must be applied separately to both RICO's substantive prohibitions and its private right of action. See supra, at 2105 - 2108. It is not enough to say that a private right of action must reach abroad because the underlying law governs conduct in foreign countries. Something more is needed, and here it is absent.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice BREYERand Justice KAGANjoin, concurring in Parts I, II, and III and dissenting from Part IV and from the judgment.
Justice BREYER, concurring in part, dissenting in part, and dissenting from the judgment.
In saying this, I note that this case does not involve the kind of purely foreign facts that create what we have sometimes called "foreign-cubed" litigation (i.e., cases where the plaintiffs are foreign, the defendants are foreign, and all the relevant conduct occurred abroad). See, e.g., Morrison v. National Australia Bank Ltd., 561 U.S. 247, 283, n. 11, 130 S.Ct. 2869, 177 L.Ed.2d 535 (2010)(Stevens, J., concurring in judgment). Rather, it has been argued that the statute at issue does not extend to such a case. See 18 U.S.C. § 1961(1)(limiting qualifying RICO predicates to those that are, e.g., "chargeable" under state law, or "indictable" or "punishable" under federal law); Tr. of Oral Arg. 32, 33-34 (respondents conceding that all of the relevant RICO predicates require some kind of connection to the United States). And, as Justice GINSBURG points out, "this case has the United States written all over it." Ante, at 2099 (opinion concurring in part, dissenting in part, and dissenting from judgment).
Justice BREYER, concurring in the judgment.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice ALITO joins, concurring in the judgment.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment.
Justice GINSBURG, concurring in the judgment.
Justice KAGAN, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins, dissenting.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice KENNEDY, Justice THOMAS, and Justice GORSUCH join, concurring.
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice THOMAS and Justice ALITO join, dissenting.
Today's opinion does resemble Casey in one respect: After disregarding significant aspects of the Court's prior jurisprudence, the majority applies the undue-burden standard in a way that will surely mystify lower courts for years to come. As in Casey, today's opinion "simply ... highlight[s] certain facts in the record that apparently strike the ... Justices as particularly significant in establishing (or refuting) the existence of an undue burden." 505 U.S., at 991, 112 S.Ct. 2791 (Scalia, J., concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part); see ante, at 2311 - 2312, 2315 - 2317. As in Casey, "the opinion then simply announces that the provision either does or does not impose a 'substantial obstacle' or an 'undue burden.' " 505 U.S., at 991, 112 S.Ct. 2791 (opinion of Scalia, J); see ante, at 2313, 2318. And still "[w]e do not know whether the same conclusions could have been reached on a different record, or in what respects the record would have had to differ before an opposite conclusion would have been appropriate." 505 U.S., at 991, 112 S.Ct. 2791 (opinion of Scalia, J.); cf. ante, at 2313, 2315 - 2316. All we know is that an undue burden now has little to do with whether the law, in a "real sense, deprive[s] women of the ultimate decision," Casey, supra, at 875, 112 S.Ct. 2791 and more to do with the loss of "individualized attention, serious conversation, and emotional support," ante, at 2318.
Justice ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and Justice THOMAS join, dissenting.
We find this approach persuasive. Imagine a group of prisoners who claim that they are being forced to drink contaminated water. These prisoners file suit against the facility where they are incarcerated. If at first their suit is dismissed because a court does not believe that the harm would be severe enough to be unconstitutional, it would make no sense to prevent the same prisoners from bringing a later suit if time and experience eventually showed that prisoners were dying from contaminated water. Such circumstances would give rise to a new claim that the prisoners' treatment violates the Constitution. Factual developments may show that constitutional harm, which seemed too remote or speculative to afford relief at the time of an earlier suit, was in fact indisputable. In our view, such changed circumstances will give rise to a new constitutional claim. This approach is sensible, and it is consistent with our precedent. See Abie State Bank v. Bryan, 282 U.S. 765, 772, 51 S.Ct. 252, 75 L.Ed. 690 (1931) (where "suit was brought immediately upon the enactment of the law," "decision sustaining the law cannot be regarded as precluding a subsequent suit for the purpose of testing [its] validity ... in the lights of the later actual experience"); cf. Lawlor v. National Screen Service Corp., 349 U.S. 322, 328, 75 S.Ct. 865, 99 L.Ed. 1122 (1955) (judgment that "precludes recovery on claims arising prior to its entry" nonetheless "cannot be given the effect of extinguishing claims which did not even then exist"); United States v. Carolene Products Co., 304 U.S. 144, 153, 58 S.Ct. 778, 82 L.Ed. 1234 (1938) ("[T]he constitutionality of a statute predicated upon the existence of a particular state of facts may be challenged by showing to the court that those facts have ceased to exist"); Nashville, C. & St. L.R. Co. v. Walters, 294 U.S. 405, 415, 55 S.Ct. 486, 79 L.Ed. 949 (1935) ("A statute valid as to one set of facts may be invalid as to another. A statute valid when enacted may become invalid by change in the conditions to which it is applied" (footnote omitted)); Third Nat. Bank of Louisville v. Stone, 174 U.S. 432, 434, 19 S.Ct. 759, 43 L.Ed. 1035 (1899) ("A question cannot be held to have been adjudged before an issue on the subject could possibly have arisen"). Justice ALITO'S dissenting opinion is simply wrong that changed circumstances showing that a challenged law has an unconstitutional effect cannot give rise to a new claim. See post, at 2328 - 2329 (hereinafter the dissent).
Bennett v. Spear, 520 U.S. 154, 178, 117 S.Ct. 1154, 137 L.Ed.2d 281 (1997), contrary to Justice KAGAN's suggestion, ante, at 1817, (concurring opinion) does not displace or alter the approach to finality established by Abbott Laboratories v. Gardner, 387 U.S. 136, 149-151, 87 S.Ct. 1507, 18 L.Ed.2d 681 (1967), and Frozen Food Express v. United States, 351 U.S. 40, 44, 76 S.Ct. 569, 100 L.Ed. 910 (1956). Bennett dealt with finality quickly, and did not cite those pathmarking decisions.
Justice KENNEDY, with whom Justice THOMAS and Justice ALITO join, concurring.
My join extends to the Court's opinion in full. The following observation seems appropriate not to qualify what the Court says but to point out that, based on the Government's representations in this case, the reach and systemic consequences of the Clean Water Act remain a cause for concern. As Justice ALITO has noted in an earlier case, the Act's reach is "notoriously unclear" and the consequences to landowners even for inadvertent violations can be crushing. See Sackett v. EPA, 566 U.S. ----, ----, 132 S.Ct. 1367, 1374-1375, 182 L.Ed.2d 367 (2012) (concurring opinion).
Justice THOMAS, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice BREYER, concurring in part.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice SOTOMAYOR joins, concurring.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice ALITO joins, dissenting.
Unlike Justice THOMAS, I am not persuaded that, sans Chevron, the Ninth Circuit should conclude on remand that service advisors are categorically exempt from hours regulations. As that court previously explained, "[s]ervice advisors may be 'salesmen' in a generic sense, but they [may fall outside the exemption because they] do not personally sell cars and they do not personally service cars." 780 F.3d 1267, 1274 (2015). Moreover, in its briefing before this Court, the Department of Labor responded to the argument that "the exemption's application to a 'partsman' " "confirm[s] that a service advisor is a salesman primarily engaged in servicing automobiles." Post, at 2129 - 2130 (Thomas, J, dissenting). See Brief for United States as Amicus Curiae 22-23 (maintaining that partsmen, unlike service advisors, actually engage in maintenance and repair work); Brief for Respondents 11 (contending that partsmen "ge[t] their hands dirty" by "work[ing] as a mechanic's right-hand man or woman"); id., at 32-35 (cataloguing descriptions of partsmen responsibilities drawn from occupational handbooks and training manuals). The Court appropriately leaves the proper ranking of service advisors to the Court of Appeals in the first instance.
Justice THOMAS, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and Justice ALITO join, concurring in the judgment.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice KENNEDY joins, dissenting.
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
According to Justice ALITO, the hypothetical inquiries described above are useful only if the IDEA and other federal laws are mutually exclusive in scope. See post, at 759 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment). That is incorrect. The point of the questions is not to show that a plaintiff faced with a particular set of circumstances could only have proceeded under Title II or § 504 -or, alternatively, could only have proceeded under the IDEA. (Depending on the circumstances, she might well have been able to proceed under both.) Rather, these questions help determine whether a plaintiff who has chosen to bring a claim under Title II or § 504 instead of the IDEA-and whose complaint makes no mention of a FAPE-nevertheless raises a claim whose substance is the denial of an appropriate education.
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice ALITOjoins, dissenting.
Perhaps good reasons exist to curtail or abandon the no-impeachment rule. Some States have done so, see Appendix to majority opinion, ante, and others have not. Ultimately, that question is not for us to decide. It should be left to the political process described by Justice ALITO. See post, at 876 - 878 (dissenting opinion). In its attempt to stimulate a "thoughtful, rational dialogue" on race relations, ante, at 871, the Court today ends the political process and imposes a uniform, national rule. The Constitution does not require such a rule. Neither should we.
Justice ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and Justice THOMAS join, dissenting.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins, dissenting.
The Government and Justice BREYER claim that our longtime and exclusive focus on elements does not resolve this case because (so they say) when we talked about "elements," we did not really mean it. "[T]he Court used 'elements,' " the Government informs us, "not to distinguish between 'means' and 'elements,' " but instead to refer to whatever the statute lists-whether means or elements. Brief for United States 8; see id., at 19. In a similar vein, Justice BREYER posits that every time we said the word "element," we "used the word generally, simply to refer to the matter at issue," without "intend[ing] to set forth a generally applicable rule." Post, at 2265 (dissenting opinion).
But a good rule of thumb for reading our decisions is that what they say and what they mean are one and the same; and indeed, we have previously insisted on that point with reference to ACCA's elements-only approach. In Descamps, the sole dissenting Justice made an argument identical to the one now advanced by the Government and Justice BREYER: that our prior caselaw had not intended to distinguish between statutes listing alternative elements and those setting out "merely alternative means" of commission. 570 U.S., at ----, 133 S.Ct., at 2298 (opinion of ALITO, J.). The Court rejected that contention, stating that "[a]ll those decisions rested on the explicit premise that the laws contain[ed] statutory phrases that cover several different crimes, not several different methods of committing one offense"-in other words, that they listed alternative elements, not alternative means. Id., at ----, n. 2, 133 S.Ct., at 2285, n. 2 (ellipsis and internal quotation marks omitted); see, e.g., Johnson v. United States, 559 U.S. 133, 144, 130 S.Ct. 1265, 176 L.Ed.2d 1 (2010) ; Nijhawan, 557 U.S., at 35, 129 S.Ct. 2294. That premise was important, we explained, because an ACCA penalty may be based only on what a jury "necessarily found" to convict a defendant (or what he necessarily admitted). Descamps, 570 U.S., at ----, ----, 133 S.Ct., at 2287, 2290. And elements alone fit that bill; a means, or (as we have called it) "non-elemental fact," is "by definition[ ] not necessary to support a conviction." Id., at ----, n. 3, ----, 133 S.Ct., at 2286, n. 3, 2288 ; see supra, at 2248. Accordingly, Descamps made clear that when the Court had earlier said (and said and said) "elements," it meant just that and nothing else.
In another solo dissent, Justice ALITO today switches gears, arguing not that our precedent is consistent with his means-based view, but instead that all of our ACCA decisions are misguided because all follow from an initial wrong turn in Taylor v. United States, 495 U.S. 575, 110 S.Ct. 2143, 109 L.Ed.2d 607 (1990). See post, at 2267 - 2268. To borrow the driving metaphor of his own dissent, Justice ALITO thus locates himself entirely off the map of our caselaw. But that is not surprising; he has harshly criticized the categorical approach (and Apprendi too) for many years. See, e.g., Johnson v. United States, 576 U.S. ----, ---- - ----, 135 S.Ct. 2551, 2577-2580, 192 L.Ed.2d 569 (2015) (ALITO, J., dissenting); Descamps, 570 U.S., at ---- - ----, 133 S.Ct., at 2296-2297 (ALITO, J., dissenting); Moncrieffe v. Holder, 569 U.S. ----, ---- - ----, 133 S.Ct. 1678, 1700-1701, 185 L.Ed.2d 727 (2013) (Alito, J., dissenting); Chambers v. United States, 555 U.S. 122, 132-134, 129 S.Ct. 687, 172 L.Ed.2d 484 (2009) (ALITO, J., concurring in judgment); see also Hurst v. Florida, 577 U.S. ----, ----, 136 S.Ct. 616, 625, 193 L.Ed.2d 504 (2016) (ALITO, J., dissenting); Alleyne v. United States, 570 U.S. ----, ---- - ----, 133 S.Ct. 2151, 2172-2173, 186 L.Ed.2d 314 (2013) (ALITO, J., dissenting).
Justice BREYER's dissent rests on the idea that, contrary to that long-accepted definition, a jury sometimes does "necessarily ha[ve] to find" a means of commission, see post, at 2260 (quoting Taylor, 495 U.S., at 602, 110 S.Ct. 2143 )-but Descamps specifically refuted that argument too. In that case, Justice ALITO made the selfsame claim: A jury, he averred, should be treated as having "necessarily found" any fact, even though non-elemental, that a later sentencing court can "infer [ ]" that the jury agreed on "as a practical matter." 570 U.S., at ----, 133 S.Ct., at 2303 (ALITO, J., dissenting). The Court rejected that view, explaining that its ACCA decisions had always demanded that a jury necessarily agree as a legal matter -which meant on elements and not on means. See id., at 2252 , n. 3, 133 S.Ct., at 2286, n. 3. The requirement, from the Court's earliest decisions, was that a judge could impose a 15-year sentence based only on a legal "certainty," not on his inference (however reasonable in a given case) about what a prior factfinder had thought. Shepard, 544 U.S., at 23, 125 S.Ct. 1254 ; see Taylor, 495 U.S., at 602, 110 S.Ct. 2143 ; supra, at 2252. Or otherwise said, the relevant question was whether a defendant was legally convicted of a certain offense (with a certain set of elements), not whether a sentencing judge believes that the factfinder would have convicted him of that offense had it been on the books. See Carachuri-Rosendo v. Holder, 560 U.S. 563, 576, 130 S.Ct. 2577, 177 L.Ed.2d 68 (2010) (rejecting such a "hypothetical" approach given a similar statute's directive to "look to the conviction itself").
In April 2011, the General Assembly passed Delegate Jones' plan with broad support from both parties and members of the Black Caucus. One of only two dissenting members of the Black Caucus was Delegate Tyler of District 75, who objected solely on the ground that the 55.4% BVAP in her district was too low. In June 2011, the U.S. Department of Justice precleared the plan.
Justice ALITO, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice SOTOMAYOR joins, dissenting.
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice THOMAS and Justice ALITO join, dissenting.
Today's decision is not compelled by Hall ; it is an expansion of it. Perhaps there are reasons to expand Hall 's holding-to say that States must read IQ tests as rigidly encompassing the entire SEM range, regardless of any other evidentiary considerations, or to say that the reasons that the CCA gave for discounting the lower end of Moore's IQ range were improper. But before holding that the Constitution demands either result, our precedent requires consulting state judgments on the matter to determine whether a national consensus has developed. Moore has presented no argument as to such a consensus, and the majority does not claim that there is one. Without looking to any such "objective evidence of contemporary values," Atkins, 536 U.S., at 312, 122 S.Ct. 2242 (internal quotation marks omitted), there is a real danger that Eighth Amendment judgments will embody "merely the subjective views of individual Justices," Coker, 433 U.S., at 592, 97 S.Ct. 2861 (plurality opinion). As Justice Frankfurter cautioned, "[o]ne must be on guard against finding in personal disapproval a reflection of more or less prevailing condemnation." Louisiana ex rel. Francis v. Resweber, 329 U.S. 459, 471, 67 S.Ct. 374, 91 L.Ed. 422 (1947) (concurring opinion).
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice ALITO joins, dissenting.
Justice SOTOMAYOR's concurrence suggests that judges interpreting a vague sentencing Guideline might rely on "statistical analysis," "gut instinct," or the judge's "own feelings" to decide whether a defendant's conviction is a crime of violence. Post, at 901 (opinion concurring in judgment) (internal quotation marks omitted). A judge granted unfettered discretion could use those same approaches in determining a defendant's sentence. Indeed, the concurrence notes that federal judges before the Guidelines considered their own "view[s] of proper sentencing policy," among other considerations. Post, at 903 - 904. Yet we have never suggested that unfettered discretion can be void for vagueness.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, concurring in the judgment.
Justice GINSBURG explains why the Court's holding today is unnecessary. See ante, at 897 - 898 (opinion concurring in judgment). Petitioner Travis Beckles was sentenced to 30 years in prison on the basis of commentary promulgated by the U.S. Sentencing Commission interpreting a sentencing provision identical to the "residual clause" we held unconstitutionally vague two years ago in Johnson v. United States, 576 U.S. ----, 135 S.Ct. 2551, 192 L.Ed.2d 569 (2015). But Johnson affords Beckles no relief, because the commentary under which he was sentenced was not unconstitutionally vague. Had the majority limited itself to this conclusion, I would have joined its opinion. Instead, the majority reaches far beyond what is necessary to resolve this case and announces that the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines as a whole are immune from vagueness challenges.
Justice GINSBURG, concurring in the judgment.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice KENNEDY joins, dissenting.
Justice GORSUCH, with whom Justice BREYER joins, dissenting.
I agree that the Colorado Civil Rights Commission (Commission) violated Jack Phillips' right to freely exercise his religion. As Justice GORSUCH explains, the Commission treated Phillips' case differently from a similar case involving three other bakers, for reasons that can only be explained by hostility toward Phillips' religion. See ante, at 1734 - 1737 (concurring opinion). The Court agrees that the Commission treated Phillips differently, and it points out that some of the Commissioners made comments disparaging Phillips' religion. See ante, at 1728 - 1731. Although the Commissioners' comments are certainly disturbing, the discriminatory application of Colorado's public-accommodations law is enough on its own to violate Phillips' rights. To the extent the Court agrees, I join its opinion.
As Justice THOMAS observes, the Court does not hold that wedding cakes are speech or expression entitled to First Amendment protection. See ante, at 1740 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment). Nor could it, consistent with our First Amendment precedents. Justice THOMAS acknowledges that for conduct to constitute protected expression, the conduct must be reasonably understood by an observer to be communicative. Ante, at 1724 - 1725 (citing Clark v. Community for Creative Non-Violence, 468 U.S. 288, 294, 104 S.Ct. 3065, 82 L.Ed.2d 221 (1984) ). The record in this case is replete with Jack Phillips' own views on the messages he believes his cakes convey. See ante, at 1742 - 1743 (THOMAS, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (describing how Phillips "considers" and "sees" his work). But Phillips submitted no evidence showing that an objective observer understands a wedding cake to convey a message, much less that the observer understands the message to be the baker's, rather than the marrying couple's. Indeed, some in the wedding industry could not explain what message, or whose, a wedding cake conveys. See Charsley, Interpretation and Custom: The Case of the Wedding Cake, 22 Man 93, 100-101 (1987) (no explanation of wedding cakes' symbolism was forthcoming "even amongst those who might be expected to be the experts"); id., at 104-105 (the cake cutting tradition might signify "the bride and groom ... as appropriating the cake" from the bride's parents). And Phillips points to no case in which this Court has suggested the provision of a baked good might be expressive conduct. Cf. ante, at 1743, n. 2 (THOMAS, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment); Hurley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston, Inc., 515 U.S. 557, 568-579, 115 S.Ct. 2338, 132 L.Ed.2d 487 (1995) (citing previous cases recognizing parades to be expressive); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560, 565, 111 S.Ct. 2456, 115 L.Ed.2d 504 (1991) (noting precedents suggesting nude dancing is expressive conduct); Spence v. Washington, 418 U.S. 405, 410, 94 S.Ct. 2727, 41 L.Ed.2d 842 (1974) (observing the Court's decades-long recognition of the symbolism of flags).
Justice GORSUCH argues that the situations "share all legally salient features." Ante, at 1735 (concurring opinion). But what critically differentiates them is the role the customer's "statutorily protected trait," ibid., played in the denial of service. Change Craig and Mullins' sexual orientation (or sex), and Phillips would have provided the cake. Change Jack's religion, and the bakers would have been no more willing to comply with his request. The bakers' objections to Jack's cakes had nothing to do with "religious opposition to same-sex weddings." Ante, at 1736 (GORSUCH, J., concurring). Instead, the bakers simply refused to make cakes bearing statements demeaning to people protected by CADA. With respect to Jack's second cake, in particular, where he requested an image of two groomsmen covered by a red "X" and the lines "God loves sinners" and "While we were yet sinners Christ died for us," the bakers gave not the slightest indication that religious words, rather than the demeaning image, prompted the objection. See supra, at 1749. Phillips did, therefore, discriminate because of sexual orientation; the other bakers did not discriminate because of religious belief; and the Commission properly found discrimination in one case but not the other. Cf. ante, at 1735 - 1737 (GORSUCH, J., concurring).
Justice KENNEDY, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice ALITO, and Justice GORSUCH join, concurring.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Precedent does not require a test such as the majority's. Rather, in saying the Act is not a longstanding health and safety law, the Court substitutes its own approach-without a defining standard-for an approach that was reasonably clear. Historically, the Court has been wary of claims that regulation of business activity, particularly health-related activity, violates the Constitution. Ever since this Court departed from the approach it set forth in Lochner v. New York, 198 U.S. 45, 25 S.Ct. 539, 49 L.Ed. 937 (1905), ordinary economic and social legislation has been thought to raise little constitutional concern. As Justice Brandeis wrote, typically this Court's function in such cases "is only to determine the reasonableness of the Legislature's belief in the existence of evils and in the effectiveness of the remedy provided." New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann, 285 U.S. 262, 286-287, 52 S.Ct. 371, 76 L.Ed. 747 (1932) (dissenting opinion); see Williamson v. Lee Optical of Okla., Inc., 348 U.S. 483, 486-488, 75 S.Ct. 461, 99 L.Ed. 563 (1955) (adopting the approach of Justice Brandeis).
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice ALITO joins, dissenting.
Three Justices, concurring in the judgment, would have held that the "Equal Protection Clause does not supply judicially manageable standards for resolving purely political gerrymandering claims." Id., at 147, 106 S.Ct. 2797 (opinion of O'Connor, J.). Justice O'Connor took issue, in particular, with the plurality's focus on factual questions concerning "statewide electoral success." Id., at 158, 106 S.Ct. 2797. She warned that allowing district courts to "strike down apportionment plans on the basis of their prognostications as to the outcome of future elections or future apportionments invites 'findings' on matters as to which neither judges nor anyone else can have any confidence." Id., at 160, 106 S.Ct. 2797.
Justice Stevens would have found that the Texas map was a partisan gerrymander based in part on the asymmetric advantage it conferred on Republicans in converting votes to seats. Id., at 466-467, 471-473, 126 S.Ct. 2594 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). Justice Souter, writing for himself and Justice GINSBURG, noted that he would not "rule out the utility of a criterion of symmetry," and that "further attention could be devoted to the administrability of such a criterion at all levels of redistricting and its review." Id., at 483-484, 126 S.Ct. 2594 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part).
We leave for another day consideration of other possible theories of harm not presented here and whether those theories might present justiciable claims giving rise to statewide remedies. Justice KAGAN's concurring opinion endeavors to address "other kinds of constitutional harm," see post, at 1938, perhaps involving different kinds of plaintiffs, see post, at 1938 - 1939, and differently alleged burdens, see ibid. But the opinion of the Court rests on the understanding that we lack jurisdiction to decide this case, much less to draw speculative and advisory conclusions regarding others. See Public Workers v. Mitchell, 330 U.S. 75, 90, 67 S.Ct. 556, 91 L.Ed. 754 (1947) (noting that courts must "respect the limits of [their] unique authority" and engage in "[j]udicial exposition ... only when necessary to decide definite issues between litigants"). The reasoning of this Court with respect to the disposition of this case is set forth in this opinion and none other. And the sum of the standing principles articulated here, as applied to this case, is that the harm asserted by the plaintiffs is best understood as arising from a burden on those plaintiffs' own votes. In this gerrymandering context that burden arises through a voter's placement in a "cracked" or "packed" district.
Justice KENNEDY explained the First Amendment associational injury deriving from a partisan gerrymander in his concurring opinion in Vieth, 541 U.S. 267, 124 S.Ct. 1769, 158 L.Ed.2d 546. "Representative democracy," Justice KENNEDY pointed out, is today "unimaginable without the ability of citizens to band together" to advance their political beliefs. Id., at 314, 124 S.Ct. 1769 (opinion concurring in judgment) (quoting California Democratic Party v. Jones, 530 U.S. 567, 574, 120 S.Ct. 2402, 147 L.Ed.2d 502 (2000) ). That means significant "First Amendment concerns arise" when a State purposely "subject[s] a group of voters or their party to disfavored treatment." 541 U.S., at 314, 124 S.Ct. 1769. Such action "burden[s] a group of voters' representational rights." Ibid. ; see id., at 315, 124 S.Ct. 1769 (similarly describing the "burden[ ] on a disfavored party and its voters" and the "burden [on] a group's representational rights"). And it does so because of their "political association," "participation in the electoral process," "voting history," or "expression of political views." Id., at 314-315, 124 S.Ct. 1769.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice BREYER, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Jeffers presented a claim-preclusion question. The Court there said not one word about issue preclusion. Nor did the Court address the staying power of an acquittal. It had no occasion to do so, as Jeffers was convicted on the first charge. Indeed, some years later, three Justices, including the author of the Jeffers plurality, stated: "There is no doubt that had the defendant in Jeffers been acquitted at the first trial, the [issue-preclusion protection] embodied in the Double Jeopardy Clause would have barred a second trial on the greater offense." Green v. Ohio, 455 U.S. 976, 980, 102 S.Ct. 1486, 71 L.Ed.2d 688 (1982) (White, J., joined by Blackmun and Powell, JJ., dissenting from the denial of certiorari) (emphasis added).
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice BREYER, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
What is more, the Government's syllogism is beside the point, because this case does not involve a passenger at all but instead the driver and sole occupant of a rental car. As Justice Powell observed in his concurring opinion in Rakas, a "distinction ... may be made in some circumstances between the Fourth Amendment rights of passengers and the rights of an individual who has exclusive control of an automobile or of its locked compartments." Id., at 154, 99 S.Ct. 421. This situation would be similar to the defendant in Jones, supra, who, as Rakas notes, had a reasonable expectation of privacy in his friend's apartment because he "had complete dominion and control over the apartment and could exclude others from it," 439 U.S., at 149, 99 S.Ct. 421. Justice Powell's observation was also consistent with the majority's explanation that "one who owns or lawfully possesses or controls property will in all likelihood have a legitimate expectation of privacy by virtue of [the] right to exclude," id., at 144, n. 12, 99 S.Ct. 421, an explanation tied to the majority's discussion of Jones .
We first consider whether Minnesota is pursuing a permissible objective in prohibiting voters from wearing particular kinds of expressive apparel or accessories while inside the polling place. The natural starting point for evaluating a First Amendment challenge to such a restriction is this Court's decision in Burson, which upheld a Tennessee law imposing a 100-foot campaign-free zone around polling place entrances. Under the Tennessee law-much like Minnesota's buffer-zone provision-no person could solicit votes for or against a candidate, party, or ballot measure, distribute campaign materials, or "display ... campaign posters, signs or other campaign materials" within the restricted zone. 504 U.S., at 193-194, 112 S.Ct. 1846 (plurality opinion). The plurality found that the law withstood even the strict scrutiny applicable to speech restrictions in traditional public forums. Id., at 211, 112 S.Ct. 1846. In his opinion concurring in the judgment, Justice Scalia argued that the less rigorous "reasonableness" standard of review should apply, and found the law "at least reasonable" in light of the plurality's analysis. Id., at 216, 112 S.Ct. 1846.
The majority's initial response to this reasoning is simply to dismiss it. "[F]ree rider arguments," the majority pronounces, "are generally insufficient to overcome First Amendment objections." Ante, at 2466 (quoting Knox, 567 U.S., at 311, 132 S.Ct. 2277 ). "To hold otherwise," it continues, "would have startling consequences" because "[m]any private groups speak out" in ways that will "benefit[ ] nonmembers." Ante, at 2466 - 2467. But that disregards the defining characteristic of this free-rider argument-that unions, unlike those many other private groups, must serve members and non-members alike. Groups advocating for "senior citizens or veterans" (to use the majority's examples) have no legal duty to provide benefits to all those individuals: They can spur people to pay dues by conferring all kinds of special advantages on their dues-paying members. Unions are-by law-in a different position, as this Court has long recognized. See, e.g., Machinists v. Street, 367 U.S. 740, 762, 81 S.Ct. 1784, 6 L.Ed.2d 1141 (1961). Justice Scalia, responding to the same argument as the majority's, may have put the point best. In a way that is true of no other private group, the "law requires the union to carry" non-members-"indeed, requires the union to go out of its way to benefit [them], even at the expense of its other interests." Lehnert v. Ferris Faculty Assn., 500 U.S. 507, 556, 111 S.Ct. 1950, 114 L.Ed.2d 572 (1991) (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). That special feature was what justified Abood : "Where the state imposes upon the union a duty to deliver services, it may permit the union to demand reimbursement for them." 500 U.S., at 556, 111 S.Ct. 1950.
Consistent with that focus, speech about the terms and conditions of employment-the essential stuff of collective bargaining-has never survived Pickering 's first step. This Court has rejected all attempts by employees to make a "federal constitutional issue" out of basic "employment matters, including working conditions, pay, discipline, promotions, leave, vacations, and terminations." Guarnieri, 564 U.S., at 391, 131 S.Ct. 2488 ; see Board of Comm'rs, Wabaunsee Cty. v. Umbehr, 518 U.S. 668, 675, 116 S.Ct. 2342, 135 L.Ed.2d 843 (1996) (stating that public employees' "speech on merely private employment matters is unprotected"). For that reason, even the Justices who originally objected to Abood conceded that the use of agency fees for bargaining on "economic issues" like "salaries and pension benefits" would not raise significant First Amendment questions. 431 U.S., at 263, n. 16, 97 S.Ct. 1782 (Powell, J., concurring in judgment).
The majority is likewise wrong to invoke "workability" as a reason for overruling Abood . Ante, at 2480 - 2481. Does Abood require drawing a line? Yes, between a union's collective-bargaining activities and its political activities. Is that line perfectly and pristinely "precis[e]," as the majority demands? Ante, at 2480 - 2481. Well, not quite that-but as exercises of constitutional linedrawing go, Abood stands well above average. In the 40 years since Abood, this Court has had to resolve only a handful of cases raising questions about the distinction. To my knowledge, the circuit courts are not divided on any classification issue; neither are they issuing distress signals of the kind that sometimes prompt the Court to reverse a decision. See, e.g., Johnson v. United States, 576 U.S. ----, ---S.Ct. ----, --- L.Ed.2d ---- (2015) (overruling precedent because of frequent splits and mass confusion). And that tranquility is unsurprising: There may be some gray areas (there always are), but in the mine run of cases, everyone knows the difference between politicking and collective bargaining. The majority cites some disagreement in two of the classification cases this Court decided -as if non-unanimity among Justices were something startling. And it notes that a dissenter in one of those cases called the Court's approach "malleable" and "not principled," ante, at 2481-as though those weren't stock terms in dissenting vocabulary. See, e.g., Murr v. Wisconsin, 582 U.S. ----, ----, 137 S.Ct. 1933, 1950-1951, 198 L.Ed.2d 497 (2017) (ROBERTS, C.J., dissenting); Dietz v. Bouldin, 579 U.S. ----, ----, 136 S.Ct. 1885, 1897, 195 L.Ed.2d 161 (2016) (THOMAS, J., dissenting); Alabama Legislative Black Caucus v. Alabama, 575 U.S. ----, ----, 135 S.Ct. 1257, 1281, 191 L.Ed.2d 314 (2015) (Scalia, J., dissenting). As I wrote in Harris a few Terms ago: "If the kind of hand-wringing about blurry lines that the majority offers were enough to justify breaking with precedent, we might have to discard whole volumes of the U.S. Reports." 573 U.S., at ----, 134 S.Ct., at 2652.
But that argument reflects a radically wrong understanding of how stare decisis operates. Justice Scalia once confronted a similar argument for "disregard[ing] reliance interests" and showed how antithetical it was to rule-of-law principles. Quill Corp. v. North Dakota, 504 U.S. 298, 320, 112 S.Ct. 1904, 119 L.Ed.2d 91 (1992) (concurring opinion). He noted first what we always tell lower courts: "If a precedent of this Court has direct application in a case, yet appears to rest on reasons rejected in some other line of decisions, [they] should follow the case which directly controls, leaving to this Court the prerogative of overruling its own decisions." Id., at 321, 112 S.Ct. 1904 (quoting Rodriguez de Quijas v. Shearson/American Express, Inc., 490 U.S. 477, 484, 109 S.Ct. 1917, 104 L.Ed.2d 526 (1989) ; some alterations omitted). That instruction, Justice Scalia explained, was "incompatible" with an expectation that "private parties anticipate our overrulings." 504 U.S., at 320, 112 S.Ct. 1904. He concluded: "[R]eliance upon a square, unabandoned holding of the Supreme Court is always justifiable reliance." Ibid. Abood 's holding was square. It was unabandoned before today. It was, in other words, the law-however much some were working overtime to make it not. Parties, both unions and governments, were thus justified in relying on it. And they did rely, to an extent rare among our decisions. To dismiss the overthrowing of their settled expectations as entailing no more than some "adjustments" and "unpleasant transition costs," ante, at 2485, is to trivialize stare decisis.
Abood particularly sticks out when viewed against our cases holding that public employees generally may not be required to support a political party. See Elrod, 427 U.S. 347, 96 S.Ct. 2673, 49 L.Ed.2d 547 ; Branti, 445 U.S. 507, 100 S.Ct. 1287, 63 L.Ed.2d 574 ; Rutan, 497 U.S. 62, 110 S.Ct. 2729, 111 L.Ed.2d 52 ; O'Hare Truck Service, Inc. v. City of Northlake, 518 U.S. 712, 116 S.Ct. 2353, 135 L.Ed.2d 874 (1996). The Court reached that conclusion despite a "long tradition" of political patronage in government. Rutan, supra, at 95, 110 S.Ct. 2729 (Scalia, J., dissenting); see also Elrod, 427 U.S., at 353, 96 S.Ct. 2673 (plurality opinion); id., at 377-378, 96 S.Ct. 2673 (Powell, J., dissenting). It is an odd feature of our First Amendment cases that political patronage has been deemed largely unconstitutional, while forced subsidization of union speech (which has no such pedigree) has been largely permitted. As Justice Powell observed: "I am at a loss to understand why the State's decision to adopt the agency shop in the public sector should be worthy of greater deference, when challenged on First Amendment grounds, than its decision to adhere to the tradition of political patronage." Abood, supra, at 260, n. 14, 97 S.Ct. 1782 (opinion concurring in judgment) (citing Elrod, supra, at 376-380, 382-387, 96 S.Ct. 2673 (Powell, J., dissenting); emphasis added). We have no occasion here to reconsider our political patronage decisions, but Justice Powell's observation is sound as far as it goes. By overruling Abood, we end the oddity of privileging compelled union support over compelled party support and bring a measure of greater coherence to our First Amendment law.
Justice Powell's separate opinion did invoke Pickering in a relevant sense, but he did so only to acknowledge the State's relatively greater interest in regulating speech when it acts as employer than when it acts as sovereign. Abood v. Detroit Bd. of Ed., 431 U.S. 209, 259, 97 S.Ct. 1782, 52 L.Ed.2d 261 (1977) (concurring in judgment). In the very next sentence, he explained that "even in public employment, a significant impairment of First Amendment rights must survive exacting scrutiny." Ibid. (internal quotation marks omitted). That is the test we apply today.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins, concurring.
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins, concurring in the judgment.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice KAGAN joins, dissenting.
Nor is the dissent's reading of the NLRA any more available to us than its reading of the Arbitration Act. The dissent imposes a vast construction on Section 7's language. Post, at 1637. But a statute's meaning does not always "turn solely" on the broadest imaginable "definitions of its component words." Yates v. United States, 574 U.S. ----, ----, 135 S.Ct. 1074, 1081, 191 L.Ed.2d 64 (2015) (plurality opinion). Linguistic and statutory context also matter. We have offered an extensive explanation why those clues support our reading today. By contrast, the dissent rests its interpretation on legislative history. Post, at 1633 - 1635; see also post, at 1642 - 1644. But legislative history is not the law. "It is the business of Congress to sum up its own debates in its legislation," and once it enacts a statute " '[w]e do not inquire what the legislature meant; we ask only what the statute means.' " Schwegmann Brothers v. Calvert Distillers Corp., 341 U.S. 384, 396, 397, 71 S.Ct. 745, 95 L.Ed. 1035 (1951) (Jackson, J., concurring) (quoting Justice Holmes). Besides, when it comes to the legislative history here, it seems Congress "did not discuss the right to file class or consolidated claims against employers." D.R. Horton, 737 F.3d, at 361. So the dissent seeks instead to divine messages from congressional commentary directed to different questions altogether-a project that threatens to "substitute [the Court] for the Congress." Schwegmann, supra, at 396, 71 S.Ct. 745.
That standard reflects two real-world attributes of cases premised on what an unhindered investigation would have found. First is the difficulty of proving that a hypothetical inquiry would have led to some disqualifying discovery, often several years after the defendant told her lies. As witnesses and other evidence disappear, the Government's effort to reconstruct the course of a "could have been" investigation confronts ever-mounting obstacles. See id., at 779, 108 S.Ct. 1537 (opinion of Scalia, J.). Second, and critical to our analysis, is that the defendant-not the Government-bears the blame for that evidentiary predicament. After all, the inquiry cannot get this far unless the defendant made an unlawful false statement and, by so doing, obstructed the normal course of an investigation. See id., at 783, 108 S.Ct. 1537 (Brennan, J., concurring) (emphasizing that "the citizen's misrepresentation [in a naturalization proceeding] necessarily frustrated the Government's investigative efforts"); see also Bigelow v. RKO Radio Pictures, Inc., 327 U.S. 251, 265, 66 S.Ct. 574, 90 L.Ed. 652 (1946) ("The most elementary conceptions of justice and public policy require that the wrongdoer shall bear the risk of the uncertainty which his own wrong has created").
Justice GORSUCH, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice ALITO, concurring in the judgment.
Justice GORSUCH would stop before answering that question, see post, at 1931 - 1932 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment), but we think that such a halfway-decision would fail to fulfill our responsibility to both parties and courts. The Government needs to know what prosecutions to bring; defendants need to know what defenses to offer; and district courts need to know how to instruct juries. Telling them only "§ 1425(a) has something to do with causation" would not much help them make those decisions. And we are well-positioned to provide further guidance. The parties have had every opportunity to address the nature of the statute's causal standard, and both gave us considered views about how the law should work in practice. See, e.g., Brief for Petitioner 23-24, 30; Brief for United States 17-18, 48; Tr. of Oral Arg. 14-16, 23-25, 39-46. Moreover, many lower courts have already addressed those same issues-including one that has called this Court's failure to provide clear guidance "maddening[ ]." Latchin, 554 F.3d, at 713 ; see, e.g., id., at 713-714 ; Munyenyezi, 781 F.3d, at 536-538 ; Alferahin, 433 F.3d, at 1155 ; Aladekoba, 61 Fed.Appx., at 27-28 ; United States v. Acheampong, 2015 WL 926113, *2-*3 (D.Kan., Mar. 3, 2015) ; United States v. Odeh, 2014 WL 5473042, *7-*8 (E.D.Mich., Oct. 27, 2014).
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice ALITO joins except for Part I, dissenting.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURG and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Perhaps for these reasons, this Court has referred to American Pipe as "equitable tolling." See Irwin v. Department of Veterans Affairs, 498 U.S. 89, 96, and n. 3, 111 S.Ct. 453, 112 L.Ed.2d 435 (1990) ; see also Young,supra, at 49, 122 S.Ct. 1036 ; Greyhound Corp. v. Mt. Hood Stages, Inc., 437 U.S. 322, 338, n., 98 S.Ct. 2370, 57 L.Ed.2d 239 (1978) (Burger, C.J., concurring) (using American Pipe as an example of "[t]he authority of a federal court, sitting as a chancellor, to toll a statute of limitations on equitable grounds"). It is true, however, that the American Pipe Court did not consider the criteria of the formal doctrine of equitable tolling in any direct manner. It did not analyze, for example, whether the plaintiffs pursued their rights with special care; whether some extraordinary circumstance prevented them from intervening earlier; or whether the defendant engaged in misconduct. See Holland v. Florida, 560 U.S. 631, 649, 130 S.Ct. 2549, 177 L.Ed.2d 130 (2010) (identifying these considerations); Young, 535 U.S., at 50, 122 S.Ct. 1036 (same). The balance of the Court's reasoning nonetheless reveals a rule based on traditional equitable powers, designed to modify a statutory time bar where its rigid application would create injustice.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice BREYER, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Justice GORSUCH, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, dissenting.
Start with the first option. Smith held that the government's use of a pen register to record the numbers people dial on their phones doesn't infringe a reasonable expectation of privacy because that information is freely disclosed to the third party phone company. 442 U.S., at 743-744, 99 S.Ct. 2577. Miller held that a bank account holder enjoys no reasonable expectation of privacy in the bank's records of his account activity. That's true, the Court reasoned, "even if the information is revealed on the assumption that it will be used only for a limited purpose and the confidence placed in the third party will not be betrayed." 425 U.S., at 443, 96 S.Ct. 1619. Today the Court suggests that Smith and Miller distinguish between kinds of information disclosed to third parties and require courts to decide whether to "extend" those decisions to particular classes of information, depending on their sensitivity. See ante, at 2216 - 2221. But as the Sixth Circuit recognized and Justice KENNEDY explains, no balancing test of this kind can be found in Smith and Miller . See ante, at 2231 - 2232 (dissenting opinion). Those cases announced a categorical rule: Once you disclose information to third parties, you forfeit any reasonable expectation of privacy you might have had in it. And even if Smith and Miller did permit courts to conduct a balancing contest of the kind the Court now suggests, it's still hard to see how that would help the petitioner in this case. Why is someone's location when using a phone so much more sensitive than who he was talking to (Smith ) or what financial transactions he engaged in (Miller )? I do not know and the Court does not say.
Katz's problems start with the text and original understanding of the Fourth Amendment, as Justice THOMAS thoughtfully explains today. Ante, at 2237 - 2244 (dissenting opinion). The Amendment's protections do not depend on the breach of some abstract "expectation of privacy" whose contours are left to the judicial imagination. Much more concretely, it protects your "person," and your "houses, papers, and effects." Nor does your right to bring a Fourth Amendment claim depend on whether a judge happens to agree that your subjective expectation to privacy is a "reasonable" one. Under its plain terms, the Amendment grants you the right to invoke its guarantees whenever one of your protected things (your person, your house, your papers, or your effects) is unreasonably searched or seized. Period.
To be sure, we must be wary of returning to the doctrine of Boyd v. United States, 116 U.S. 616, 6 S.Ct. 524, 29 L.Ed. 746. Boyd invoked the Fourth Amendment to restrict the use of subpoenas even for ordinary business records and, as Justice ALITO notes, eventually proved unworkable. See ante, at 2253 (dissenting opinion); 3 W. LaFave, J. Israel, N. King, & O. Kerr, Criminal Procedure § 8.7(a), pp. 185-187 (4th ed. 2015). But if we were to overthrow Jackson too and deny Fourth Amendment protection to any subpoenaed materials, we would do well to reconsider the scope of the Fifth Amendment while we're at it. Our precedents treat the right against self-incrimination as applicable only to testimony, not the production of incriminating evidence. See Fisher v. United States, 425 U.S. 391, 401, 96 S.Ct. 1569, 48 L.Ed.2d 39 (1976). But there is substantial evidence that the privilege against self-incrimination was also originally understood to protect a person from being forced to turn over potentially incriminating evidence. Nagareda, supra, at 1605-1623 ; Rex v. Purnell, 96 Eng. Rep. 20 (K.B. 1748); Slobogin, Privacy at Risk 145 (2007).
That the Katz test departs so far from the text of the Fourth Amendment is reason enough to reject it. But the Katz test also has proved unworkable in practice. Jurists and commentators tasked with deciphering our jurisprudence have described the Katz regime as "an unpredictable jumble," "a mass of contradictions and obscurities," "all over the map," "riddled with inconsistency and incoherence," "a series of inconsistent and bizarre results that [the Court] has left entirely undefended," "unstable," "chameleon-like," " 'notoriously unhelpful,' " "a conclusion rather than a starting point for analysis," "distressingly unmanageable," "a dismal failure," "flawed to the core," "unadorned fiat," and "inspired by the kind of logic that produced Rube Goldberg's bizarre contraptions." Even Justice Harlan, four years after penning his concurrence in Katz, confessed that the test encouraged "the substitution of words for analysis." United States v. White, 401 U.S. 745, 786, 91 S.Ct. 1122, 28 L.Ed.2d 453 (1971) (dissenting opinion).
Truth be told, this Court does not treat the Katz test as a descriptive inquiry. Although the Katz test is phrased in descriptive terms about society's views, this Court treats it like a normative question-whether a particular practice should be considered a search under the Fourth Amendment. Justice Harlan thought this was the best way to understand his test. See White, 401 U.S., at 786, 91 S.Ct. 1122 (dissenting opinion) (explaining that courts must assess the "desirability" of privacy expectations and ask whether courts "should" recognize them by "balanc[ing]" the "impact on the individual's sense of security ... against the utility of the conduct as a technique of law enforcement"). And a normative understanding is the only way to make sense of this Court's precedents, which bear the hallmarks of subjective policymaking instead of neutral legal decisionmaking. "[T]he only thing the past three decades have established about the Katz test" is that society's expectations of privacy "bear an uncanny resemblance to those expectations of privacy that this Court considers reasonable." Carter, 525 U.S., at 97, 119 S.Ct. 469 (opinion of Scalia, J.). Yet, "[t]hough we know ourselves to be eminently reasonable, self-awareness of eminent reasonableness is not really a substitute for democratic election." Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain, 542 U.S. 692, 750, 124 S.Ct. 2739, 159 L.Ed.2d 718 (2004) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment).
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, dissenting.
Compulsory process was also familiar to the founding generation in part because it reflected "the ancient proposition of law" that " ' "the public ... has a right to every man's evidence." ' " United States v. Nixon, 418 U.S. 683, 709, 94 S.Ct. 3090, 41 L.Ed.2d 1039 (1974) ; see also ante, at 2228 (KENNEDY, J., dissenting). As early as 1612, "Lord Bacon is reported to have declared that 'all subjects, without distinction of degrees, owe to the King tribute and service, not only of their deed and hand, but of their knowledge and discovery.' " Blair, supra, at 279-280, 39 S.Ct. 468. That duty could be "onerous at times," yet the Founders considered it "necessary to the administration of justice according to the forms and modes established in our system of government." Id., at 281, 39 S.Ct. 468 ; see also Calandra, supra, at 345, 94 S.Ct. 613.
United States v. Jones, 565 U.S. 400, 405, 132 S.Ct. 945, 181 L.Ed.2d 911 (2012). So by its terms, the Fourth Amendment does not apply to the compulsory production of documents, a practice that involves neither any physical intrusion into private space nor any taking of property by agents of the state. Even Justice Brandeis-a stalwart proponent of construing the Fourth Amendment liberally-acknowledged that "under any ordinary construction of language," "there is no 'search' or 'seizure' when a defendant is required to produce a document in the orderly process of a court's procedure." Olmstead v. United States, 277 U.S. 438, 476, 48 S.Ct. 564, 72 L.Ed. 944 (1928) (dissenting opinion).
Nor is there any reason to believe that the Founders intended the Fourth Amendment to regulate courts' use of compulsory process. American colonists rebelled against the Crown's physical invasions of their persons and their property, not against its acquisition of information by any and all means. As Justice Black once put it, "[t]he Fourth Amendment was aimed directly at the abhorred practice of breaking in, ransacking and searching homes and other buildings and seizing people's personal belongings without warrants issued by magistrates." Katz, 389 U.S., at 367, 88 S.Ct. 507 (dissenting opinion). More recently, we have acknowledged that "the Fourth Amendment was the founding generation's response to the reviled 'general warrants' and 'writs of assistance' of the colonial era, which allowed British officers to rummage through homes in an unrestrained search for evidence of criminal activity." Riley v. California, 573 U.S. ----, ----, 134 S.Ct. 2473, 2494, 189 L.Ed.2d 430 (2014).
Three decades later, the Court considered more sophisticated surveillance of the sort envisioned in Knotts and found that different principles did indeed apply. In United States v. Jones, FBI agents installed a GPS tracking device on Jones's vehicle and remotely monitored the vehicle's movements for 28 days. The Court decided the case based on the Government's physical trespass of the vehicle. 565 U.S., at 404-405, 132 S.Ct. 945. At the same time, five Justices agreed that related privacy concerns would be raised by, for example, "surreptitiously activating a stolen vehicle detection system" in Jones's car to track Jones himself, or conducting GPS tracking of his cell phone. Id., at 426, 428, 132 S.Ct. 945 (ALITO, J., concurring in judgment); id., at 415, 132 S.Ct. 945 (SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring). Since GPS monitoring of a vehicle tracks "every movement" a person makes in that vehicle, the concurring Justices concluded that "longer term GPS monitoring in investigations of most offenses impinges on expectations of privacy"-regardless whether those movements were disclosed to the public at large. Id., at 430, 132 S.Ct. 945 (opinion of Alito, J.); id., at 415, 132 S.Ct. 945 (opinion of Sotomayor, J.).
The Court has in fact already shown special solicitude for location information in the third-party context. In Knotts, the Court relied on Smith to hold that an individual has no reasonable expectation of privacy in public movements that he "voluntarily conveyed to anyone who wanted to look." Knotts, 460 U.S., at 281, 103 S.Ct. 1081 ; see id., at 283, 103 S.Ct. 1081 (discussing Smith ). But when confronted with more pervasive tracking, five Justices agreed that longer term GPS monitoring of even a vehicle traveling on public streets constitutes a search. Jones, 565 U.S., at 430, 132 S.Ct. 945 (ALITO, J., concurring in judgment); id., at 415, 132 S.Ct. 945 (SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring). Justice GORSUCH wonders why "someone's location when using a phone" is sensitive, post, at 2262, and Justice KENNEDY assumes that a person's discrete movements "are not particularly private," post, at 2232. Yet this case is not about "using a phone" or a person's movement at a particular time. It is about a detailed chronicle of a person's physical presence compiled every day, every moment, over several years. Such a chronicle implicates privacy concerns far beyond those considered in Smith and Miller .
Justice KENNEDY, with whom Justice THOMAS and Justice ALITO join, dissenting.
Fourth, by invalidating the Government's use of court-approved compulsory process in this case, the Court calls into question the subpoena practices of federal and state grand juries, legislatures, and other investigative bodies, as Justice ALITO's opinion explains. See post, at 2247 - 2257 (dissenting opinion). Yet the Court fails even to mention the serious consequences this will have for the proper administration of justice.
Justice KENNEDY believes that there is such a rubric-the "property-based concepts" that Katz purported to move beyond. Post, at 2224 (dissenting opinion). But while property rights are often informative, our cases by no means suggest that such an interest is "fundamental" or "dispositive" in determining which expectations of privacy are legitimate. Post, at 2227 - 2228. Justice THOMAS (and to a large extent Justice GORSUCH) would have us abandon Katz and return to an exclusively property-based approach. Post, at 2235 - 2236, 2244 - 2246 (THOMAS J., dissenting); post, at 2264 - 2266 (GORSUCH, J., dissenting). Katz of course "discredited" the "premise that property interests control," 389 U.S., at 353, 88 S.Ct. 507, and we have repeatedly emphasized that privacy interests do not rise or fall with property rights, see, e.g., United States v. Jones, 565 U.S. 400, 411, 132 S.Ct. 945, 181 L.Ed.2d 911 (2012) (refusing to "make trespass the exclusive test"); Kyllo v. United States, 533 U.S. 27, 32, 121 S.Ct. 2038, 150 L.Ed.2d 94 (2001) ("We have since decoupled violation of a person's Fourth Amendment rights from trespassory violation of his property."). Neither party has asked the Court to reconsider Katz in this case.
Justice KENNEDY argues that this case is in a different category from Jones and the dragnet-type practices posited in Knotts because the disclosure of the cell-site records was subject to "judicial authorization." Post, at 2230 - 2232. That line of argument conflates the threshold question whether a "search" has occurred with the separate matter of whether the search was reasonable. The subpoena process set forth in the Stored Communications Act does not determine a target's expectation of privacy. And in any event, neither Jones nor Knotts purported to resolve the question of what authorization may be required to conduct such electronic surveillance techniques. But see Jones, 565 U.S., at 430, 132 S.Ct. 945 (ALITO, J., concurring in judgment) (indicating that longer term GPS tracking may require a warrant).
For the reasons articulated by Justice Scalia in Sosa and by Justice GORSUCH today, I am not certain that Sosa was correctly decided. See id., at 739-751, 124 S.Ct. 2739 (Scalia, J., dissenting); post, at 1412 - 1414 (GORSUCH, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment). But even taking that decision on its own terms, this Court should not create causes of action under the ATS against foreign corporate defendants. As part of Sosa 's second step, a court should decline to create a cause of action as a matter of federal common law where the result would be to further, not avoid, diplomatic strife. Properly applied, that rule easily resolves the question presented by this case.
Justice GORSUCH, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice BREYER, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
First, Justice GORSUCH says it "pass[es] understanding" why federal courts have exercised jurisdiction over ATS claims raised by foreign plaintiffs against foreign defendants for breaches of international norms. See ante, at 1412 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment). Modern ATS cases, however, are not being litigated against a blank slate. The Court held in Sosa that Congress authorized the federal courts to "recognize private causes of action for certain torts in violation of the law of nations," 542 U.S., at 724, 124 S.Ct. 2739 so long as the underlying norm had no "less definite content and acceptance among civilized nations than the historical paradigms familiar when § 1350 was enacted," id., at 732, 124 S.Ct. 2739. That holding was no mere "suggestion," ante, at 1420 (opinion of GORSUCH, J.), as this Court has made clear. See Kiobel, 569 U.S., at 116-117, 133 S.Ct. 1659.
Justice ALITO, adopting a more absolutist position than the plurality, asserts without qualification that "federal courts should not create causes of action under the ATS against foreign corporate defendants" because doing so "would precipitate ... diplomatic strife." Ante, at 1415, 1414 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment). The conclusion that ATS suits against foreign corporate defendants for law-of-nations and treaty violations always will cause diplomatic friction, and that such suits will never be necessary "to help the United States avoid diplomatic friction," ante, at 1411, however, is at odds with the considered judgment of the Executive Branch and Congress regarding the importance of holding foreign corporations to account for certain egregious conduct. As noted, see Part II-B-1, supra, the Executive Branch has twice urged the Court not to foreclose the ability of foreign nationals to sue foreign corporate defendants under the ATS. The United States also has ratified several international agreements that require it to impose liability on corporations, both foreign and domestic, for certain actions, including the financing of terrorism. See supra, at 1424 - 1425. Congress, too, has expressly authorized civil suits against corporations for acts related to terrorism. See 18 U.S.C. § 2333. The Executive Branch and Congress surely would not have taken these positions, entered into these obligations, or made available these causes of action if the result were intolerable diplomatic strife.
Justice ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice THOMAS, and Justice GORSUCH join, dissenting.
The criminal trial enjoys pride of place in our criminal justice system in a way that an appeal from that trial does not. The Constitution twice guarantees the right to a criminal trial, see Art. III, § 2; Amdt. 6, but does not guarantee the right to an appeal at all, Halbert v. Michigan, 545 U.S. 605, 610, 125 S.Ct. 2582, 162 L.Ed.2d 552 (2005). The trial "is the main event at which a defendant's rights are to be determined," McFarland v. Scott, 512 U.S. 849, 859, 114 S.Ct. 2568, 129 L.Ed.2d 666 (1994) (internal quotation marks omitted), "and not simply a tryout on the road to appellate review," Freytag v. Commissioner, 501 U.S. 868, 895, 111 S.Ct. 2631, 115 L.Ed.2d 764 (1991) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (internal quotation marks omitted). And it is where the stakes for the defendant are highest, not least because it is where a presumptively innocent defendant is adjudged guilty, see Ross v. Moffitt, 417 U.S. 600, 610, 94 S.Ct. 2437, 41 L.Ed.2d 341 (1974) ; Wainwright, 433 U.S., at 90, 97 S.Ct. 2497 and where the trial judge or jury makes factual findings that nearly always receive deference on appeal and collateral review, see Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 318-319, 99 S.Ct. 2781, 61 L.Ed.2d 560 (1979) ; see also Cavazos v. Smith, 565 U.S. 1, 2, 132 S.Ct. 2, 181 L.Ed.2d 311 (2011) (per curiam ) (under deferential standard of review, "judges will sometimes encounter convictions that they believe to be mistaken, but that they must nevertheless uphold").
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Still, the Court asks us to look away in yet another direction. At the founding, the Court notes, the Executive could sometimes both dispense and revoke public franchises. And because, it says, invention patents are a species of public franchises, the Court argues the Executive should be allowed to dispense and revoke them too. Ante, at 1374 - 1375. But labels aside, by the time of the founding the law treated patents protected by the Patent Clause quite differently from ordinary public franchises. Many public franchises amounted to little more than favors resembling the original royal patents the framers expressly refused to protect in the Patent Clause. The Court points to a good example: the state-granted exclusive right to operate a toll bridge. Ante, at 1374 - 1375. By the founding, courts in this country (as in England) had come to view anticompetitive monopolies like that with disfavor, narrowly construing the rights they conferred. See Proprietors of Charles River Bridge v. Proprietors of Warren Bridge, 11 Pet. 420, 544, 9 L.Ed. 773 (1837). By contrast, courts routinely applied to invention patents protected by the Patent Clause the "liberal common sense construction" that applies to other instruments creating private property rights, like land deeds. Davis v. Palmer, 7 F.Cas. 154, 158 (No. 3,645) (C.C.D.Va.1827) (Marshall, C.J.); see also Mossoff, Reevaluating the Patent Privilege 990 (listing more differences in treatment). As Justice Story explained, invention patents protected by the Patent Clause were "not to be treated as mere monopolies odious in the eyes of the law, and therefore not to be favored." Ames v. Howard, 1 F.Cas. 755, 756 (No. 326) (C.C.D.Mass.1833). For precisely these reasons and as we've seen, the law traditionally treated patents issued under the Patent Clause very differently than monopoly franchises when it came to governmental invasions. Patents alone required independent judges. Nor can simply invoking a mismatched label obscure that fact. The people's historic rights to have independent judges decide their disputes with the government should not be a "constitutional Maginot Line, easily circumvented" by such "simpl[e] maneuver [s]." Bank Markazi v. Peterson, 578 U.S. ----, ----, 136 S.Ct. 1310, 1335, 194 L.Ed.2d 463 (2016) (ROBERTS, C.J., dissenting).
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice THOMAS and Justice GORSUCH join, dissenting.
In Molina-Martinez, the Court recognized that "[w]hen a defendant is sentenced under an incorrect Guidelines range-whether or not the defendant's ultimate sentence falls within the correct range-the error itself can, and most often will, be sufficient to show a reasonable probability of a different outcome absent the error." 578 U.S., at ----, 136 S.Ct., at 1345. In other words, an error resulting in a higher range than the Guidelines provide usually establishes a reasonable probability that a defendant will serve a prison sentence that is more than "necessary" to fulfill the purposes of incarceration. 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a) ; Tapia, 564 U.S., at 325, 131 S.Ct. 2382. "To a prisoner," this prospect of additional "time behind bars is not some theoretical or mathematical concept." Barber v. Thomas, 560 U.S. 474, 504, 130 S.Ct. 2499, 177 L.Ed.2d 1 (2010) (KENNEDY, J., dissenting). "[A]ny amount of actual jail time" is significant, Glover v. United States, 531 U.S. 198, 203, 121 S.Ct. 696, 148 L.Ed.2d 604 (2001), and "ha[s] exceptionally severe consequences for the incarcerated individual [and] for society which bears the direct and indirect costs of incarceration," United States v. Jenkins, 854 F.3d 181, 192 (C.A.2 2017). The possibility of additional jail time thus warrants serious consideration in a determination whether to exercise discretion under Rule 52(b). It is crucial in maintaining public perception of fairness and integrity in the justice system that courts exhibit regard for fundamental rights and respect for prisoners "as people." T. Tyler, Why People Obey the Law 164 (2006).
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice ALITO joins, dissenting.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice BREYER, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, and with whom Justice KAGAN joins except as to Part III-A, dissenting.
Justice GINSBURG suggests the Director might yet avoid this command by refusing to review a petition he thinks too broad while signaling his willingness to entertain one more tailored to his sympathies. Post, at 1360 (dissenting opinion). We have no occasion today to consider whether this stratagem is consistent with the statute's demands. See Cuozzo Speed Technologies, LLC v. Lee, 579 U.S. ----, ----, 136 S.Ct. 2131, 2141, 195 L.Ed.2d 423 (2016) (noting that courts may invalidate " 'shenanigans' " by the Director that are "outside [his] statutory limits"); CAB v. Delta Air Lines, Inc., 367 U.S. 316, 328, 81 S.Ct. 1611, 6 L.Ed.2d 869 (1961) (questioning an agency's "power to do indirectly what it cannot do directly"). But even assuming (without granting) the law would tolerate this tactic, it would show only that a lawful means exists for the Director to achieve his policy aims-not that he "should be allowed to improvise on the powers granted by Congress" by devising an extralegal path to the same goal. Id., at 330, 81 S.Ct. 1611. That an agency's improvisation might be thought by some more expedient than what the law allows, post, at 1360, does nothing to commend it either, for lawful ends do not justify unlawful means.
Justice THOMAS, concurring, suggests that my reading of the statute " 'raises serious constitutional doubts.' " Ante, at 1849 (quoting Jennings v. Rodriguez, 583 U.S. ----, ----, 138 S.Ct. 830, 836, 200 L.Ed.2d 122 (2018) ). He believes that it "would seriously interfere with the States' constitutional authority to set and enforce voter qualifications." Ante, at 1849. At the same time, the majority "assume[s]" that "Congress has the constitutional authority to limit voting eligibility requirements in the way respondents suggest." Ante, at 1846, n. 5. But it suggests possible agreement with Justice THOMAS, for it makes this assumption only "for the sake of argument." Ibid.
JUSTICE THOMAS, with whom JUSTICE GORSUCH joins, and with whom JUSTICE ALITO joins as to Parts I and II, dissenting.
Justice GORSUCH, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins, dissenting.
Justice GORSUCH, with whom Justice THOMAS and Justice ALITO join, dissenting.
Dissenting, Justice SOTOMAYOR reads the majority opinion as adopting a rigid rule (more rigid, in fact, than Armstrong 's) that First Amendment retaliatory arrest plaintiffs who can't prove the absence of probable cause must produce "comparison-based evidence" in every case. Post , at 1736 - 1738. But I do not understand the majority as going that far. The only citation the majority offers in support of its new standard is Armstrong , which expressly left open the possibility that other kinds of evidence, such as admissions, might be enough to allow a claim to proceed. Given that, I retain hope that lower courts will apply today's decision "commonsensically," post , at 1741 - 1742, and with sensitivity to the competing arguments about whether and how Armstrong might apply in the arrest setting.
Justice GINSBURG, concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part.
To give partial credit where due: The Court sensibly rejects the absolute probable-cause bar urged by petitioners and embraced by Justice THOMAS, see ante, at 1730 - 1731 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment), and its contrary rule will at least allow the First Amendment to operate in some cases where it is sorely needed. The majority's reasons for imposing a probable-cause bar in some cases but not others, however, do not withstand scrutiny. And by arbitrarily insisting upon comparison-based evidence, the majority's rule fences out First Amendment violations for which redress is equally if not more "warranted," ante, at 1726 - 1727, leaving the public exposed potentially to flagrant abuses.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice SOTOMAYOR would have us extend Mt. Healthy and rely on that "tried and true" approach as the exclusive standard in the retaliatory arrest context. See post , at 1735 - 1737, 1742 (dissenting opinion). But not even respondent Bartlett argues for such a rule. And since our decisions in Hartman and Reichle , no court of appeals has applied that approach in retaliatory arrest cases of this sort. Justice SOTOMAYOR criticizes the Court for spending "[m]uch of its opinion ... analogizing to Hartman ," post, at 1736 - 1737, but of course Hartman is our precedent most directly on point. To the extent retaliatory arrest cases raise concerns distinct from that precedent, we have departed from Hartman to afford greater First Amendment protection. See infra , at 1741 - 1742.
Justice GORSUCH, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins, dissenting.
Hall 's determination that the Constitution does not contemplate sovereign immunity for each State in a sister State's courts misreads the historical record and misapprehends the "implicit ordering of relationships within the federal system necessary to make the Constitution a workable governing charter and to give each provision within that document the full effect intended by the Framers." Id. , at 433, 99 S.Ct. 1182 (Rehnquist, J., dissenting). As Chief Justice Marshall explained, the Founders did not state every postulate on which they formed our Republic-"we must never forget, that it is a constitution we are expounding." McCulloch v. Maryland , 4 Wheat. 316, 407, 4 L.Ed. 579 (1819). And although the Constitution assumes that the States retain their sovereign immunity except as otherwise provided, it also fundamentally adjusts the States' relationship with each other and curtails their ability, as sovereigns, to decline to recognize each other's immunity.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Because I would conclude that Commission ALJs are not officers for purposes of the Appointments Clause, it is not necessary to reach the constitutionality of their removal protections. See ante, at 2057 - 2058 (BREYER, J., concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part). In any event, for at least the reasons stated in Justice BREYER's opinion, Free Enterprise Fund is readily distinguishable from the circumstances at play here. See ante, at 2058 - 2062.
The Court also provided an alternative basis for viewing the STJs as officers. "Even if the duties of [STJs in major cases] were not as significant as we ... have found them," we stated, "our conclusion would be unchanged." Freytag, 501 U.S., at 878, 111 S.Ct. 2631. That was because the Government had conceded that in minor matters, where STJs could enter final decisions, they had enough "independent authority" to count as officers. Ibid. And we thought it made no sense to classify the STJs as officers for some cases and employees for others. See ibid. Justice SOTOMAYOR relies on that back-up rationale in trying to reconcile Freytag with her view that "a prerequisite to officer status is the authority" to issue at least some "final decisions." Post, at 2066 - 2067 (dissenting opinion). But Freytag has two parts, and its primary analysis explicitly rejects Justice SOTOMAYOR's theory that final decisionmaking authority is a sine qua non of officer status. See 501 U.S., at 881-882, 111 S.Ct. 2631. As she acknowledges, she must expunge that reasoning to make her reading work. See post, at 2066 - 2067 ("That part of the opinion[ ] was unnecessary to the result").
Justice BREYER disagrees with our decision to wrest further proceedings from Judge Elliot, arguing that "[f]or him to preside once again would not violate the structural purposes [of] the Appointments Clause." Post, at 2064 (opinion concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part). But our Appointments Clause remedies are designed not only to advance those purposes directly, but also to create "[ ]incentive [s] to raise Appointments Clause challenges." Ryder v. United States, 515 U.S. 177, 183, 115 S.Ct. 2031, 132 L.Ed.2d 136 (1995). We best accomplish that goal by providing a successful litigant with a hearing before a new judge. That is especially so because (as Justice BREYER points out) the old judge would have no reason to think he did anything wrong on the merits, see post, at 2064 -and so could be expected to reach all the same judgments. But we do not hold that a new officer is required for every Appointments Clause violation. As Justice BREYER suggests, we can give that remedy here because other ALJs (and the Commission) are available to hear this case on remand. See ibid. If instead the Appointments Clause problem is with the Commission itself, so that there is no substitute decisionmaker, the rule of necessity would presumably kick in and allow the Commission to do the rehearing. See FTC v. Cement Institute, 333 U.S. 683, 700-703, 68 S.Ct. 793, 92 L.Ed. 1010 (1948) ; 3 K. Davis, Administrative Law Treatise § 19.9 (2d ed. 1980).
Justice ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice GORSUCH, and Justice KAVANAUGH join, dissenting.
Justice GORSUCH, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
Justice GORSUCH argues that equating "potentially responsible parties" with "covered persons" overlooks the fact that the terms "use different language, appear in different statutory sections, and address different matters." Post , at 1365 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). He contends that "potentially responsible party" as used in § 122(e)(6) should be read as limited to the settlement context, and that if Congress intended the phrase to have broader reach-to refer more generally to those potentially liable under § 107(a)-then Congress would have used the term "covered person." Post , at 1360 - 1361.
Justice ALITO argues that this jurisdictional question "may turn out not to matter in this case" because we remand for further proceedings that may end the litigation. Post , at 1357 - 1358 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). But Atlantic Richfield seeks more than a remand. It contends that the lawsuit should be dismissed because the Montana courts lack jurisdiction, and the Federal Government agrees. The difference between outright dismissal and further proceedings matters. We granted review of this issue and both parties have fully briefed and argued it. Simply leaving the question unanswered at this point would leave the parties in a state of uncertainty as to whether the litigation is proceeding in the proper forum. We therefore find it both "necessary" and "prudent" to decide the issue. Post , at 1357.
The integrity and legitimacy of our criminal justice system depend upon consistency, predictability, and evenhandedness. Regrettably, the divided decisions in Freeman, and my concurrence in particular, have done little to foster those foundational principles. Quite the opposite, my individual views, which "[n]o other Justice ... shares," have contributed to ongoing discord among the lower courts, sown confusion among litigants, and left "the governing rule uncertain." Arizona v. Gant, 556 U.S. 332, 354, 129 S.Ct. 1710, 173 L.Ed.2d 485 (2009) (Scalia, J., concurring); see Brief for National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers et al. as Amici Curiae 3-27 (arguing that the Freeman concurrence leads to unpredictable and inconsistent results).
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice THOMAS and Justice ALITO join, dissenting.
A defendant is eligible for a sentence reduction following a retroactive Guidelines amendment if he was "sentenced to a term of imprisonment based on a sentencing range that has subsequently been lowered by the Sentencing Commission." 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c)(2). When a defendant enters into a binding "Type-C" plea agreement pursuant to Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 11(c)(1)(C), however, the resulting sentence is "dictated by the terms of the agreement entered into by the parties, not the judge's Guidelines calculation." Freeman, 564 U.S., at 536, 131 S.Ct. 2685 (SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in judgment). Five Justices recognized as much in Freeman . See ibid. ; id., at 544, 131 S.Ct. 2685 (ROBERTS, C.J., dissenting).
To resolve these differences over the proper application of Marks and the proper interpretation of § 3582(c)(2), the Court granted certiorari in the present case. 583 U.S. ----, 138 S.Ct. 542, 199 L.Ed.2d 422 (2017). The first two questions, relating to Marks, are as follows: (1) "Whether this Court's decision in Marks means that the concurring opinion in a 4-1-4 decision represents the holding of the Court where neither the plurality's reasoning nor the concurrence's reasoning is a logical subset of the other"; and (2) "Whether, under Marks, the lower courts are bound by the four-Justice plurality opinion in Freeman, or, instead, by Justice SOTOMAYOR's separate concurring opinion with which all eight other Justices disagreed." Pet. for Cert. i.
Two cases decided after Freeman now reinforce this proposition. See Molina-Martinez, 578 U.S., at ---- - ----, 136 S.Ct., at 1346-1347 ; Peugh, 569 U.S., at 541-544, 133 S.Ct. 2072. These cases confirm that the Guidelines remain a basis for almost all federal sentences. In Peugh, the Court recognized that "[e]ven after Booker rendered the Sentencing Guidelines advisory, district courts have in the vast majority of cases imposed either within-Guidelines sentences or sentences that depart downward from the Guidelines on the Government's motion." Id., at 543, 133 S.Ct. 2072. And in Molina-Martinez, the Court explained that "[t]he Commission's statistics demonstrate the real and pervasive effect the Guidelines have on sentencing." 578 U.S., at ----, 136 S.Ct., at 1346. In short, experience has shown that, although the interpretation proffered by Justice SOTOMAYOR's concurring opinion in Freeman could be one permissible reading of § 3582(c)(2), the system Congress put in place is best implemented, as a systemic, structural matter, by the interpretation confirmed in the instant case.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
One could also reasonably fear that objections about unexpected applications will not be deployed neutrally. Often lurking just behind such objections resides a cynicism that Congress could not possibly have meant to protect a disfavored group. Take this Court's encounter with the Americans with Disabilities Act's directive that no " 'public entity' " can discriminate against any " 'qualified individual with a disability.' " Pennsylvania Dept. of Corrections v. Yeskey , 524 U.S. 206, 208, 118 S.Ct. 1952, 141 L.Ed.2d 215 (1998). Congress, of course, didn't list every public entity the statute would apply to. And no one batted an eye at its application to, say, post offices. But when the statute was applied to prisons , curiously, some demanded a closer look: Pennsylvania argued that "Congress did not 'envisio[n] that the ADA would be applied to state prisoners.' " Id ., at 211-212, 118 S.Ct. 1952. This Court emphatically rejected that view, explaining that, "in the context of an unambiguous statutory text," whether a specific application was anticipated by Congress "is irrelevant." Id. , at 212, 118 S.Ct. 1952. As Yeskey and today's cases exemplify, applying protective laws to groups that were politically unpopular at the time of the law's passage-whether prisoners in the 1990s or homosexual and transgender employees in the 1960s-often may be seen as unexpected. But to refuse enforcement just because of that, because the parties before us happened to be unpopular at the time of the law's passage, would not only require us to abandon our role as interpreters of statutes; it would tilt the scales of justice in favor of the strong or popular and neglect the promise that all persons are entitled to the benefit of the law's terms. Cf. post , at 1769 - 1773 (ALITO, J., dissenting); post, at 1833 - 1834 (KAVANAUGH, J., dissenting).
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, dissenting.
The questions answer themselves. Even if discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity could be squeezed into some arcane understanding of sex discrimination, the context in which Title VII was enacted would tell us that this is not what the statute's terms were understood to mean at that time. To paraphrase something Justice Scalia once wrote, "our job is not to scavenge the world of English usage to discover whether there is any possible meaning" of discrimination because of sex that might be broad enough to encompass discrimination because of sexual orientation or gender identity. Chisom v. Roemer , 501 U.S. 380, 410, 111 S.Ct. 2354, 115 L.Ed.2d 348 (1991) (dissenting opinion). Without strong evidence to the contrary (and there is none here), our job is to ascertain and apply the "ordinary meaning" of the statute. Ibid . And in 1964, ordinary Americans most certainly would not have understood Title VII to ban discrimination because of sexual orientation or gender identity.
Justices Douglas and Fortas thought that a homosexual is merely "one, who by some freak, is the product of an arrested development." Boutilier , 387 U.S. at 127, 87 S.Ct. 1563 (Douglas, J., dissenting); see also id. , at 125, 87 S.Ct. 1563 (Brennan, J., dissenting) (based on lower court dissent).
As a result, many Americans will not buy the novel interpretation unearthed and advanced by the Court today. Many will no doubt believe that the Court has unilaterally rewritten American vocabulary and American law-a "statutory amendment courtesy of unelected judges." Hively , 853 F.3d at 360 (Sykes, J., dissenting). Some will surmise that the Court succumbed to "the natural desire that beguiles judges along with other human beings into imposing their own views of goodness, truth, and justice upon others." Furman v. Georgia , 408 U.S. 238, 467, 92 S.Ct. 2726, 33 L.Ed.2d 346 (1972) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting).
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins, concurring.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice BREYER, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Put simply, being regulated by the State does not make one a state actor. See Sullivan , 526 U.S. at 52, 119 S.Ct. 977 ; Blum , 457 U.S. at 1004, 102 S.Ct. 2777 ; Rendell-Baker , 457 U.S. at 841-842, 102 S.Ct. 2764 ; Jackson , 419 U.S. at 350, 95 S.Ct. 449 ; Moose Lodge , 407 U.S. at 176-177, 92 S.Ct. 1965. As the Court's cases have explained, the "being heavily regulated makes you a state actor" theory of state action is entirely circular and would significantly endanger individual liberty and private enterprise. The theory would be especially problematic in the speech context, because it could eviscerate certain private entities' rights to exercise editorial control over speech and speakers on their properties or platforms. Not surprisingly, as Justice THOMAS has pointed out, this Court has "never even hinted that regulatory control, and particularly direct regulatory control over a private entity's First Amendment speech rights," could justify subjecting the regulated private entity to the constraints of the First Amendment. Denver Area , 518 U.S. at 829, 116 S.Ct. 2374 (opinion concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part).
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice BREYER, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
The last time this Court considered a case centering on public-access channels, five Justices described an interest like the one here as similar to an easement. Although Justice BREYER did not conclude that a public-access channel was indeed a public forum, he likened the cable company's agreement to reserve such channels "to the reservation of a public easement, or a dedication of land for streets and parks, as part of a municipality's approval of a subdivision of land." Denver Area , 518 U.S. at 760-761, 116 S.Ct. 2374 (joined by Stevens and Souter, JJ.). And Justice Kennedy observed not only that an easement would be an appropriate analogy, id., at 793-794, 116 S.Ct. 2374 (opinion concurring in part, concurring in judgment in part, and dissenting in part, joined by GINSBURG, J.), but also that "[p]ublic access channels meet the definition of a public forum," id., at 791, 116 S.Ct. 2374, "even though they operate over property to which the cable operator holds title," id., at 792, 116 S.Ct. 2374 ; see also id., at 792-793, 116 S.Ct. 2374 (noting that the entire cable system's existence stems from the municipality's decision to grant the franchise). What those five Justices suggested in 1996 remains true today.
In Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Defense & Educational Fund, Inc. , this Court said in passing dicta that "a speaker must seek access to public property or to private property dedicated to public use to evoke First Amendment concerns." 473 U.S. 788, 801, 105 S.Ct. 3439, 87 L.Ed.2d 567 (1985). But Cornelius dealt with government-owned property. As Justice THOMAS explained in Denver Area Educational Telecommunications Consortium, Inc. v. FCC , the Court's admittedly imprecise and overbroad phrase in Cornelius is not consistent with this Court's case law and should not be read to suggest that private property owners or private lessees are subject to First Amendment constraints whenever they dedicate their private property to public use or otherwise open their property for speech. 518 U.S. 727, 827-828, 116 S.Ct. 2374, 135 L.Ed.2d 888 (1996) (opinion concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part).
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins, concurring in the judgment.
As Justice KAVANAUGH explains, the Fourth Circuit was incorrect. Interpreting a statute does not "determine the validity" of an agency order interpreting or implementing the statute. See post , at 2062 - 2064 (opinion concurring in judgment).
Justice KAVANAUGH, with whom Justice THOMAS, Justice ALITO, and Justice GORSUCH join, concurring in the judgment.
The practical consequences likewise support a default rule of allowing review. Denying judicial review of an agency's interpretation of the statute in enforcement actions can be grossly inefficient and unfair. It would be wholly impractical-and a huge waste of resources-to expect and require every potentially affected party to bring pre-enforcement Hobbs Act challenges against every agency order that might possibly affect them in the future. After all, as Justice Powell stated in a similar context, it "is totally unrealistic to assume that more than a fraction of the persons and entities affected by a regulation-especially small contractors scattered across the country-would have knowledge of its promulgation or familiarity with or access to the Federal Register." Adamo Wrecking Co. v. United States , 434 U.S. 275, 290, 98 S.Ct. 566, 54 L.Ed.2d 538 (1978) (concurring opinion). On some occasions, the entities against whom an enforcement action is brought may not even have existed back when an agency order was issued. In short, it is unfair to expect potentially affected parties to predict the future.
One more point on Yakus : The Government's reliance on that decision is problematic for yet another reason. Yakus was a wartime case, where the need for quick and definitive judicial rulings on the legality of agency orders was at its apex. That wartime need renders Yakus , in Justice Powell's words, "at least arguably distinguishable" in civil enforcement proceedings. Adamo Wrecking , 434 U.S. at 290, 98 S.Ct. 566 (concurring opinion).
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins, concurring.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice BREYER, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Justice KAGAN, concurring in part.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment.
Justice GORSUCH, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, concurring in the judgment.
As today's plurality rightly indicates in Part II-A, however, Lemon was a misadventure. It sought a "grand unified theory" of the Establishment Clause but left us only a mess. See ante , at 2086 - 2087 (plurality opinion). How much "purpose" to promote religion is too much (are Sunday closing laws that bear multiple purposes, religious and secular, problematic)? How much "effect" of advancing religion is tolerable (are even incidental effects disallowed)? What does the "entanglement" test add to these inquiries? Even beyond all that, how "reasonable" must our "reasonable observer" be, and what exactly qualifies as impermissible "endorsement" of religion in a country where "In God We Trust" appears on the coinage, the eye of God appears in its Great Seal, and we celebrate Thanksgiving as a national holiday ("to Whom are thanks being given")? Harris v. Zion , 927 F.2d 1401, 1423 (C.A.7 1991) (Easterbrook, J., dissenting). Nearly half a century after Lemon and, the truth is, no one has any idea about the answers to these questions. As the plurality documents, our "doctrine [is] in such chaos" that lower courts have been "free to reach almost any result in almost any case." McConnell, Religious Participation in Public Programs: Religious Freedom at a Crossroads, 59 U. Chi. L. Rev. 115, 119 (1992). Scores of judges have pleaded with us to retire Lemon , scholars of all stripes have criticized the doctrine, and a majority of this Court has long done the same. Ante , at 2081 (plurality opinion). Today, not a single Member of the Court even tries to defend Lemon against these criticisms-and they don't because they can't. As Justice Kennedy explained, Lemon is "flawed in its fundamentals," has proved "unworkable in practice," and is "inconsistent with our history and our precedents." County of Allegheny , 492 U.S. at 655, 669, 109 S.Ct. 3086 (opinion concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part).
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice SOTOMAYOR joins, dissenting.
Another reason to avoid a constitutional test that turns on the "sectarian" nature of religious speech is that the Court has suggested "formally dispens[ing]" with this factor in related contexts. Mitchell , 530 U.S. at 826, 120 S.Ct. 2530 (plurality opinion). Among other reasons, the "sectarian" test "has a shameful pedigree" that originated during the 1870s when Congress considered the Blaine Amendment, "which would have amended the Constitution to bar any aid to sectarian institutions." Id., at 828, 120 S.Ct. 2530. "Consideration of the amendment arose at a time of pervasive hostility to the Catholic Church and to Catholics in general, and it was an open secret that 'sectarian' was code for 'Catholic.' " Ibid. This anti-Catholic hostility may well have played a role in the Court's later decisions. Everson v. Board of Ed. of Ewing , 330 U.S. 1, 67 S.Ct. 504, 91 L.Ed. 711 (1947), for example, was written by Justice Black, who would later accuse Catholics who advocated for textbook loans to religious schools of being "powerful sectarian religious propagandists ... looking toward complete domination and supremacy of their particular brand of religion." Board of Ed. of Central School Dist. No. 1 v. Allen , 392 U.S. 236, 251, 88 S.Ct. 1923, 20 L.Ed.2d 1060 (1968) (Black, J., dissenting). Even by the time of Lemon v. Kurtzman , 403 U.S. 602, 91 S.Ct. 2105, 29 L.Ed.2d 745 (1971), some Justices were still "influenced by residual anti-Catholicism and by a deep suspicion of Catholic schools." Laycock, The Underlying Unity of Separation and Neutrality, 46 Emory L. J. 43, 58 (1997). Indeed, the Court's opinion in Lemon "relied on what it considered to be inherent risks in religious schools despite the absence of a record in Lemon itself and despite contrary fact-finding by the district court in the companion case." Laycock, supra, at 58 (footnote omitted); see generally W. Ball, Mere Creatures of the State?, 35-40 (1994). And in his concurring opinion, Justice Douglas (joined by Justice Black) repeatedly quoted an anti-Catholic book, including for the proposition that, in Catholic parochial schools, " '[t]he whole education of the child is filled with propaganda.' " 403 U.S. at 635, n. 20, 91 S.Ct. 2105 (quoting L. Boettner, Roman Catholicism 360 (1962)); see 403 U.S. at 636, 91 S.Ct. 2105 (similar). The tract said that Hitler, Mussolini, and Stalin learned the "secret[s] of [their] success" in indoctrination from the Catholic Church, and that "an undue proportion of the gangsters, racketeers, thieves, and juvenile delinquents who roam our big city streets come ... from the [Catholic] parochial schools," where children are taught by "brain-washed," " 'ignorant European peasants.' " Boettner, supra, at 363, 370-372.
Justice GORSUCH, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice THOMAS, and Justice ALITO join, dissenting.
Justice ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and Justice KAVANAUGH join, concurring in the judgment.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, concurring in the judgment.
From early in its history, a central function of this Court has been to adjudicate disputes that require interpretation of the Commerce Clause in order to determine its meaning, its reach, and the extent to which it limits state regulations of commerce. Gibbons v. Ogden, 9 Wheat. 1, 6 L.Ed. 23 (1824), began setting the course by defining the meaning of commerce. Chief Justice Marshall explained that commerce included both "the interchange of commodities" and "commercial intercourse." Id., at 189, 193. A concurring opinion further stated that Congress had the exclusive power to regulate commerce. See id., at 236 (opinion of Johnson, J.). Had that latter submission prevailed and States been denied the power of concurrent regulation, history might have seen sweeping federal regulations at an early date that foreclosed the States from experimentation with laws and policies of their own, or, on the other hand, proposals to reexamine Gibbons ' broad definition of commerce to accommodate the necessity of allowing States the power to enact laws to implement the political will of their people.
Three Justices based their decision to uphold the physical presence rule on stare decisis alone. Id., at 320, 112 S.Ct. 1904 (Scalia, J., joined by KENNEDY and THOMAS, JJ., concurring in part and concurring in judgment). Dissenting in relevant part, Justice White argued that "there is no relationship between the physical-presence/nexus rule the Court retains and Commerce Clause considerations that allegedly justify it." Id., at 327, 112 S.Ct. 1904 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part).
Justice Byron White joined the majority opinion in National Bellas Hess, Inc. v. Department of Revenue of Ill., 386 U.S. 753, 87 S.Ct. 1389, 18 L.Ed.2d 505 (1967). Twenty-five years later, we had the opportunity to overrule Bellas Hess in Quill Corp. v. North Dakota, 504 U.S. 298, 112 S.Ct. 1904, 119 L.Ed.2d 91 (1992). Only Justice White voted to do so. See id., at 322, 112 S.Ct. 1904 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). I should have joined his opinion. Today, I am slightly further removed from Quill than Justice White was from Bellas Hess . And like Justice White, a quarter century of experience has convinced me that Bellas Hess and Quill "can no longer be rationally justified." 504 U.S., at 333, 112 S.Ct. 1904. The same is true for this Court's entire negative Commerce Clause jurisprudence. See Comptroller of Treasury of Md. v. Wynne, 575 U.S. ----, ----, 135 S.Ct. 1787, 1811-1812, 191 L.Ed.2d 813 (2015) (THOMAS, J., dissenting). Although I adhered to that jurisprudence in Quill, it is never too late to "surrende[r] former views to a better considered position." McGrath v. Kristensen, 340 U.S. 162, 178, 71 S.Ct. 224, 95 L.Ed. 173 (1950) (Jackson, J., concurring). I therefore join the Court's opinion.
Our dormant commerce cases usually prevent States from discriminating between in-state and out-of-state firms. National Bellas Hess, Inc. v. Department of Revenue of Ill ., 386 U.S. 753, 87 S.Ct. 1389, 18 L.Ed.2d 505 (1967), and Quill Corp. v. North Dakota, 504 U.S. 298, 112 S.Ct. 1904, 119 L.Ed.2d 91 (1992), do just the opposite. For years they have enforced a judicially created tax break for out-of-state Internet and mail-order firms at the expense of in-state brick-and-mortar rivals. See ante, at 2093 - 2094; Direct Marketing Assn. v. Brohl, 814 F.3d, 1129, 1150 (C.A.10 2016) (Gorsuch, J. concurring). As Justice White recognized 26 years ago, judges have no authority to construct a discriminatory "tax shelter" like this. Quill, supra, at 329, 112 S.Ct. 1904 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). The Court is right to correct the mistake and I am pleased to join its opinion.
Justice ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice THOMAS, and Justice KAVANAUGH join, dissenting.
Notably, the four Justices who dissented in Mille Lacs protested that the Court "effectively overrule[d] Race Horse sub silentio ." 526 U.S. at 219, 119 S.Ct. 1187 (Rehnquist, C.J., dissenting). Others have agreed with this assessment. See, e .g ., State v. Buchanan , 138 Wash. 2d 186, 211-212, 978 P. 2d 1070, 1083 (1999) ("[T]he United States Supreme Court effectively overruled Race Horse in Minnesota v.Mille Lacs ").
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice GINSBURG, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins, concurring.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice BREYER, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Justice KAGAN, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice BREYER, and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.
But in highlighting the preclusion concern, the majority only adds to the case for respecting stare decisis -because that issue can always be addressed by Congress. When "correction can be had by legislation," Justice Brandeis once stated, the Court should let stand even "error[s on] matter[s] of serious concern." Square D Co. v. Niagara Frontier Tariff Bureau, Inc. , 476 U.S. 409, 424, 106 S.Ct. 1922, 90 L.Ed.2d 413 (1986) (quoting Burnet v. Coronado Oil & Gas Co. , 285 U.S. 393, 406, 52 S.Ct. 443, 76 L.Ed. 815 (1932) (dissenting)). Or otherwise said, stare decisis then "carries enhanced force." Kimble , 576 U.S., at ----, 135 S.Ct., at 2409 ; see South Dakota v. Wayfair, Inc. , 585 U.S. ----, ----, 138 S.Ct. 2080, 2101, 201 L.Ed.2d 403 (2018) (ROBERTS, C.J., dissenting) (The stare decisis "bar is even higher" when Congress "can, if it wishes, override this Court's decisions with contrary legislation"). Here, Congress can reverse the San Remo preclusion rule any time it wants, and thus give property owners an opportunity-after a state-court proceeding-to litigate in federal court. The San Remo decision, as noted above, interpreted the federal full faith and credit statute; Congress need only add a provision to that law to flip the Court's result. In fact, Congress has already considered proposals responding to San Remo -though so far to no avail. See Brief for Congressman Steve King et al. as Amici Curiae 7. Following this Court's normal rules of practice means leaving the San Remo "ball[ in] Congress's court," so that branch can decide whether to pick it up. Kimble , 576 U.S., at ----, 135 S.Ct., at 2409.
In holding that a property owner acquires an irrevocable right to just compensation immediately upon a taking, First English adopted a position Justice Brennan had taken in an earlier dissent. See id ., at 315, 318, 107 S.Ct. 2378 (quoting and citing San Diego Gas & Elec. Co. v. San Diego , 450 U.S. 621, 654, 657, 101 S.Ct. 1287, 67 L.Ed.2d 551 (1981) (Brennan, J., dissenting)). In that opinion, Justice Brennan explained that "once there is a 'taking,' compensation must be awarded" because "[a]s soon as private property has been taken, whether through formal condemnation proceedings, occupancy, physical invasion, or regulation, the landowner has already suffered a constitutional violation." Id. , at 654, 101 S.Ct. 1287.
The dissent, doing what respondents do not even dare to attempt, defends the original rationale of Williamson County -that there is no Fifth Amendment violation, and thus no Fifth Amendment claim, until the government denies the property owner compensation in a subsequent proceeding. But although the dissent makes a more thoughtful and considered argument than Williamson County , it cannot reconcile its view with our repeated holdings that a property owner acquires a constitutional right to compensation at the time of the taking. See supra , at 2170 - 2173. The only reason that a taking would automatically entitle a property owner to the remedy of compensation is that, as Justice Brennan explained, with the uncompensated taking "the landowner has already suffered a constitutional violation." San Diego Gas & Elec. Co. , 450 U.S. at 654, 101 S.Ct. 1287 (dissenting opinion). The dissent here provides no more reason to resist that conclusion than did Williamson County .
The decision has come in for repeated criticism over the years from Justices of this Court and many respected commentators. See San Remo , 545 U.S. at 348, 125 S.Ct. 2491 (Rehnquist, C.J., joined by O'Connor, Kennedy, and THOMAS, JJ., concurring in judgment); Arrigoni Enterprises , LLC v. Durham , 578 U.S. ----, 136 S.Ct. 1409, 194 L.Ed.2d 821 (2016) (THOMAS, J., joined by Kennedy, J., dissenting from denial of certiorari); Merrill, Anticipatory Remedies for Takings, 128 Harv. L. Rev. 1630, 1647-1649 (2015) ; McConnell, Horne and the Normalization of Takings Litigation: A Response to Professor Echeverria, 43 Env. L. Rep. 10749, 10751 (2013); Friedman, Under the Law of Federal Jurisdiction: Allocating Cases Between Federal and State Courts, 104 Colum. L. Rev. 1211, 1264 (2004) ; Monaghan, State Law Wrongs, State Law Remedies, and the Fourteenth Amendment, 86 Colum. L. Rev. 979, 989 (1986). Even the academic defenders of the state-litigation requirement base it on federalism concerns (although they do not reconcile those concerns with the settled construction of § 1983 ) rather than the reasoning of the opinion itself. See Echeverria, Horne v. Department of Agriculture : An Invitation To Reexamine "Ripeness" Doctrine in Takings Litigation, 43 Env. L. Rep. 10735, 10744 (2013); Sterk, The Demise of Federal Takings Litigation, 48 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 251, 288 (2006).
Justice Brennan was joined by Justices Stewart, Marshall, and Powell. The majority did not disagree with Justice Brennan's analysis of the merits, but concluded that the Court lacked jurisdiction to address the question presented. Justice Rehnquist, concurring on the jurisdictional issue, noted that if he were satisfied that jurisdiction was proper, he "would have little difficulty in agreeing with much of what is said in the dissenting opinion." 450 U.S. at 633-634, 101 S.Ct. 1287. The Court reached the merits of the question presented in San Diego in First English , adopting Justice Brennan's view in an opinion by Chief Justice Rehnquist.
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice THOMAS and Justice GORSUCH join, dissenting.
Our opinion stated, however, that it "express[ed] no view on the merits of the underlying question outside of the AEDPA context." Dunn , 583 U.S., at ----, 138 S.Ct., at 11-12. And a concurring opinion authored by Justice GINSBURG and joined by Justices BREYER and SOTOMAYOR teed up this question for review in a later case. Id., at ----, 138 S.Ct., at 10 ("The issue whether a State may administer the death penalty to a person whose disability leaves him without memory of his commission of a capital offense is a substantial question not yet addressed by the Court. Appropriately presented, the issue would warrant full airing").
In Ford , the Court held that the Eighth Amendment prohibits the execution of a person who is "insane," and in the portion of Justice MARSHALL's lead opinion that was joined by a plurality, Justice MARSHALL equated insanity with a mental condition that "prevents [a person] from comprehending the reasons for the penalty or its implications." 477 U.S. at 417, 106 S.Ct. 2595. Justice POWELL, who provided the fifth vote for the decision, took a similar position. See id., at 422-423, 106 S.Ct. 2595 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment). In Panetti , which built on the holding in Ford , the Court used the term in a similar way. See 551 U.S. at 958-960, 127 S.Ct. 2842. Accordingly, a defendant suffers from "insanity," as the term is used in Ford and Panetti , if the prisoner does not understand the reason for his execution.
As we've seen, two Members of the Court whose votes were essential to the judgment in Glossip argued that establishing cruelty consistent with the Eighth Amendment's original meaning demands slightly more than the majority opinion there (or the Baze plurality opinion it followed) suggested. Instead of requiring an inmate to establish that a State has unreasonably refused to alter its method of execution to avoid a risk of unnecessary pain, Justice THOMAS and Justice Scalia contended that an inmate must show that the State intended its method to inflict such pain. See Glossip , 576 U.S., at ----, 135 S.Ct., at 2750 (THOMAS, J., concurring); Baze , 553 U.S. at 94-107, 128 S.Ct. 1520 (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment). But revisiting that debate isn't necessary here because, as we'll see, the State was entitled to summary judgment in this case even under the more forgiving Baze - Glossip test. See Part III, infra .
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join as to all but Part III, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS concurs in the majority's imposition of an "alternative method" requirement, but would also permit Bucklew's execution on the theory that a method of execution violates the Eighth Amendment " 'only if it is deliberately designed to inflict pain.' " Ante , at 1135 (concurring opinion) (quoting Baze , 553 U.S. at 94, 128 S.Ct. 1520 (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment)). But that is not the proper standard.
I agree with the majority that these delays are excessive. Undue delays in death penalty cases frustrate the interests of the State and of surviving victims, who have "an important interest" in seeing justice done quickly. Hill , 547 U.S. at 584, 126 S.Ct. 2096. Delays also exacerbate the suffering that accompanies an execution itself. Glossip , 576 U.S., at ---- - ----, 135 S.Ct., at 2764-2767 (BREYER, J., dissenting). Delays can "aggravate the cruelty of capital punishment" by subjecting the offender to years in solitary confinement, and delays also "undermine [capital punishment's] jurisprudential rationale" by reducing its deterrent effect and retributive value. Id., at ----, ----, 135 S.Ct., at 2769, 2772.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins, concurring.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice BREYER, Justice KAGAN, and Justice GORSUCH join, dissenting.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins, concurring.
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, dissenting.
Here, along with the historical evidence we described above from the earlier trials, as well as the State's striking of five of six black prospective jurors at the sixth trial, the dramatically disparate questioning and investigation of black prospective jurors and white prospective jurors at the sixth trial strongly suggests that the State was motivated in substantial part by a discriminatory intent. We agree with the observation of the dissenting justices of the Mississippi Supreme Court: The "numbers described above are too disparate to be explained away or categorized as mere happenstance." 240 So.3d at 1161 (opinion of King, J.).
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins as to Parts I, II, and III, dissenting.
The State next tried Flowers for all four murders together. In this "third" trial-actually the first trial for the murders of Robert Golden and Carmen Rigby-the State struck 15 black jurors. App. 35. The trial court found no Batson violations. Flowers v. State , 947 So.2d 910, 916 (Miss. 2007) (plurality opinion). On appeal, Flowers did not challenge four of the strikes, id., at 918, and the Mississippi Supreme Court unanimously upheld the trial court's ruling as to nine of the other strikes, see id., at 918-935. Four justices, constituting a plurality of the court, would have held that two strikes violated Batson , 947 So.2d at 926, 928 ; one justice concurred only in the judgment because she "d[id] not agree" with the "plurality" "that this case is reversible on the Batson issue alone," id., at 939 (Cobb, P. J., concurring in result); and four justices would have held that no strikes violated Batson , 947 So.2d at 942-943 (Smith, C. J., dissenting). If the concurring justice thought any strikes were impermissible, Batson would have required her to reverse on that basis.
Pretending for a moment that the concurring justice in the third trial had voted differently than she did, the history still could not overcome the absence of evidence of purposeful race discrimination in this trial. Flowers forthrightly acknowledged that he needed to show "discrimination in this trial in order to have a Batson violation." Id., at 23 (emphasis added). At a minimum, the state courts' finding-that the history does not carry Flowers' burden of proving purposeful race discrimination here-is not clearly erroneous. The courts below were presented with Flowers' view of the history, and even accepting that view and "[t]aking into account the 'historical evidence' of past discrimination," the Mississippi Supreme Court held that the trial court did not err "in finding that the State did not violate Batson ." 240 So.2d at 1135; see id., at 1122-1124. The majority simply disregards this assessment by the state courts.
But this framing of the issue ignores the nature and basis of the peremptory strike and the realities of racial prejudice. A peremptory strike reflects no judgment on a juror's competence, ability, or fitness. Instead, the strike is exercised based on intuitions that a potential juror may be less sympathetic to a party's case. As Chief Justice Burger emphasized, "venire-pool exclusion bespeaks a priori across-the-board total unfitness, while peremptory-strike exclusion merely suggests potential partiality in a particular isolated case. " Batson , supra , at 122-123, 106 S.Ct. 1712 (dissenting opinion) (internal quotation marks omitted); accord, Powers , supra, at 424, 111 S.Ct. 1364 (Scalia, J., dissenting). "[T]he question a prosecutor or defense counsel must decide is not whether a juror of a particular race or nationality is in fact partial, but whether one from a different group is less likely to be." Swain , 380 U.S. at 220-221, 85 S.Ct. 824 (emphasis added). Therefore, "veniremen are not always judged solely as individuals for the purpose of exercising peremptory challenges"; instead, "they are challenged in light of the limited knowledge counsel has of them, which may include their group affiliations, in the context of the case to be tried." Id. , at 221, 85 S.Ct. 824.
In sum, as other Members of this Court have recognized, Batson charted the course for eliminating peremptory strikes. See, e.g., Rice v. Collins , 546 U.S. 333, 344, 126 S.Ct. 969, 163 L.Ed.2d 824 (2006) (BREYER, J., concurring); Batson , supra, at 107-108, 106 S.Ct. 1712 (Marshall, J., concurring). Although those Justices welcomed the prospect, I do not. The peremptory system "has always been held essential to the fairness of trial by jury." Lewis , supra, at 376, 13 S.Ct. 136. And the basic premise of Strauder -that a juror's racial prejudices can make a trial less fair-has not become "obsolete." McCollum , 505 U.S. at 61, 112 S.Ct. 2348 (opinion of THOMAS, J.). The racial composition of a jury matters because racial biases, sympathies, and prejudices still exist. This is not a matter of "assumptions," as Batson said. It is a matter of reality. The Court knows these prejudices exist. Why else would it say that "a capital defendant accused of an interracial crime is entitled to have prospective jurors informed of the race of the victim and questioned on the issue of racial bias"? Turner v. Murray , 476 U.S. 28, 36-37, 106 S.Ct. 1683, 90 L.Ed.2d 27 (1986). For that matter, why else say here that "Flowers is black" and the "prosecutor is white"? Ante, at 2235. Yet the Court continues to apply a line of cases that prevents, among other things, black defendants from striking potentially hostile white jurors. I remain "certain that black criminal defendants will rue the day that this Court ventured down this road that inexorably will lead to the elimination of peremptory strikes." McCollum , supra, at 60, 112 S.Ct. 2348 (opinion of THOMAS, J.).
Academic studies appear to support this commonsense proposition. See, e.g., Carter & Mazzula, Race and Racial Identity Status Attitudes, 11 J. Ethnicity Crim. Justice 196, 211 (2013) ("[R]acial bias exists in juror decision making"); Ellsworth & Sommers, Race in the Courtroom, 26 Personality & Soc. Psychol. Bull. 1367, 1367-1379 (2000). Cf. J. E. B. v. Alabama ex rel. T. B. , 511 U.S. 127, 148-149, 114 S.Ct. 1419, 128 L.Ed.2d 89 (1994) (O'Connor, J., concurring) ("We know that like race, gender matters").
The principal dissent suggests that Mandel has no bearing on this case, post, at 2440, and n. 5 (opinion of SOTOMAYOR, J.) (hereinafter the dissent), but our opinions have reaffirmed and applied its deferential standard of review across different contexts and constitutional claims. In Din, Justice KENNEDY reiterated that "respect for the political branches' broad power over the creation and administration of the immigration system" meant that the Government need provide only a statutory citation to explain a visa denial. 576 U.S., at ----, 135 S.Ct., at 2141 (opinion concurring in judgment). Likewise in Fiallo, we applied Mandel to a "broad congressional policy" giving immigration preferences to mothers of illegitimate children. 430 U.S., at 795, 97 S.Ct. 1473. Even though the statute created a "categorical" entry classification that discriminated on the basis of sex and legitimacy, post, at 2440, n. 5, the Court concluded that "it is not the judicial role in cases of this sort to probe and test the justifications" of immigration policies. 430 U.S., at 799, 97 S.Ct. 1473 (citing Mandel, 408 U.S., at 770, 92 S.Ct. 2576 ). Lower courts have similarly applied Mandel to broad executive action. See Rajah v. Mukasey, 544 F.3d 427, 433, 438-439 (C.A.2 2008) (upholding National Security Entry-Exit Registration System instituted after September 11, 2001).
The majority begins its constitutional analysis by noting that this Court, at times, "has engaged in a circumscribed judicial inquiry when the denial of a visa allegedly burdens the constitutional rights of a U.S. citizen." Ante, at 2419 (citing Kleindienst v. Mandel, 408 U.S. 753, 92 S.Ct. 2576, 33 L.Ed.2d 683 (1972) ). As the majority notes, Mandel held that when the Executive Branch provides "a facially legitimate and bona fide reason" for denying a visa, "courts will neither look behind the exercise of that discretion, nor test it by balancing its justification." Id., at 770, 92 S.Ct. 2576. In his controlling concurrence in Kerry v. Din, 576 U.S. ----, 135 S.Ct. 2128, 192 L.Ed.2d 183 (2015), Justice KENNEDY applied Mandel 's holding and elaborated that courts can " 'look behind' the Government's exclusion of" a foreign national if there is "an affirmative showing of bad faith on the part of the consular officer who denied [the] visa." Din, 576 U.S., at ----, 135 S.Ct., at 2141 (opinion concurring in judgment). The extent to which Mandel and Din apply at all to this case is unsettled, and there is good reason to think they do not. Indeed, even the Government agreed at oral argument that where the Court confronts a situation involving "all kinds of denigrating comments about" a particular religion and a subsequent policy that is designed with the purpose of disfavoring that religion but that "dot[s] all the i's and ... cross[es] all the t's," Mandel would not "pu[t] an end to judicial review of that set of facts." Tr. of Oral Arg. 16.
Although a majority of the Court in Korematsu was willing to uphold the Government's actions based on a barren invocation of national security, dissenting Justices warned of that decision's harm to our constitutional fabric. Justice Murphy recognized that there is a need for great deference to the Executive Branch in the context of national security, but cautioned that "it is essential that there be definite limits to [the government's] discretion," as "[i]ndividuals must not be left impoverished of their constitutional rights on a plea of military necessity that has neither substance nor support." 323 U.S., at 234, 65 S.Ct. 193 (Murphy, J., dissenting). Justice Jackson lamented that the Court's decision upholding the Government's policy would prove to be "a far more subtle blow to liberty than the promulgation of the order itself," for although the executive order was not likely to be long lasting, the Court's willingness to tolerate it would endure. Id., at 245-246, 65 S.Ct. 193.
Justice BREYER focuses on only one aspect of our consideration-the waiver program and other exemptions in the Proclamation. Citing selective statistics, anecdotal evidence, and a declaration from unrelated litigation, Justice BREYER suggests that not enough individuals are receiving waivers or exemptions. Post, at 2431 - 2433 (dissenting opinion). Yet even if such an inquiry were appropriate under rational basis review, the evidence he cites provides "but a piece of the picture," post, at 2432, and does not affect our analysis.
Joining Justice KAGAN's dissenting opinion in full, I write separately to emphasize once again how treacherously the Court has strayed from the principle that "arbitration is a matter of consent, not coercion." Stolt-Nielsen S.A. v. AnimalFeeds Int'l Corp. , 559 U.S. 662, 681, 130 S.Ct. 1758, 176 L.Ed.2d 605 (2010) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Notwithstanding recent steps to counter the Court's current jurisprudence, mandatory individual arbitration continues to thwart "effective access to justice" for those encountering diverse violations of their legal rights. DIRECTV , 577 U.S., at ----, 136 S.Ct., at 471 (GINSBURG, J., dissenting). The Court, paradoxically reciting the mantra that "[c]onsent is essential," ante , at ----, has facilitated companies' efforts to deny employees and consumers the "important right" to sue in court, and to do so collectively, by inserting solo-arbitration-only clauses that parties lacking bargaining clout cannot remove. CompuCredit Corp. v. Greenwood , 565 U.S. 95, 115, 132 S.Ct. 665, 181 L.Ed.2d 586 (2012) (GINSBURG, J., dissenting). When companies can "muffl[e] grievance[s] in the cloakroom of arbitration," Merrill Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith, Inc. v. Ware , 414 U.S. 117, 136, 94 S.Ct. 383, 38 L.Ed.2d 348 (1973), the result is inevitable: curtailed enforcement of laws "designed to advance the well-being of [the] vulnerable." Epic , 584 U.S., at ----, 138 S.Ct., at 1646 (GINSBURG, J., dissenting). "Congressional correction of the Court's elevation of the FAA over" the rights of employees and consumers "to act in concert" remains "urgently in order." Id. , at ----, 138 S.Ct., at 1633.
I am not persuaded at this point that the Court of Appeals lacked jurisdiction over this case, and for that reason I do not join Justice BREYER's dissenting opinion. Nevertheless, I believe that Justice BREYER's opinion raises weighty issues that are worthy of further consideration if raised in the appropriate circumstances in the lower federal courts.
Given this extraordinary displacement of state law-which, as I have shown, no precedent commands, see supra, at ---- - -----I must admit to not understanding Justice THOMAS's full concurrence in today's opinion. See ante, at ---- (expressing "skeptic[ism]" about the majority's reasoning but joining its opinion out of a (misplaced) respect for precedent). I would think the opinion a hard pill to swallow for someone who believes that any implied preemption "leads to the illegitimate-and thus, unconstitutional-invalidation of state laws." Wyeth v. Levine , 555 U.S. 555, 604, 129 S.Ct. 1187, 173 L.Ed.2d 51 (2009) (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment); see, e.g., Bates v. Dow Agrosciences LLC , 544 U.S. 431, 459, 125 S.Ct. 1788, 161 L.Ed.2d 687 (2005) (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment in part) ("[P]re-emption analysis is not a freewheeling judicial inquiry into whether a state statute is in tension with federal objectives" (internal quotation marks and alteration omitted)).
Varela and Justice KAGAN defend application of the rule on the basis that it is nondiscriminatory. It does not conflict with the FAA, they argue, because it is a neutral rule that gives equal treatment to arbitration agreements and other contracts alike. See Brief for Respondent 18, 25-26; post , at ---- - ---- (KAGAN, J., dissenting). We have explained, however, that such an equal treatment principle cannot save from preemption general rules "that target arbitration either by name or by more subtle methods, such as by 'interfer[ing] with fundamental attributes of arbitration.' " Epic Systems , 584 U.S., at ----, 138 S.Ct., at 1622 (quoting Concepcion , 563 U.S. at 344, 131 S.Ct. 1740 ).
Justice Breyer repeatedly refers to the order in this case as "interlocutory," post , at ---- - ---- (dissenting opinion), but-as the language quoted above makes clear-Randolph expressly held that such an order is "final" under the FAA. Justice BREYER also claims that Randolph "explicitly reserved the [jurisdictional] question that we face now," post , at ----, but Randolph reserved a different question. In that case, the District Court had denied a motion to stay. We noted that, if the District Court had entered a stay instead of dismissing the case, an appeal would have been barred by 9 U.S.C. § 16(b)(1). That said, we expressly refrained from addressing whether the District Court should have granted the stay. See 531 U.S. at 87, n. 2, 121 S.Ct. 513. That is the question we reserved. Justice BREYER would have us take up that question today, post , at ----, ----, but there is no basis for doing so. The FAA provides that a district court "shall on application of one of the parties stay" the case pending the arbitration. 9 U.S.C. § 3 (emphasis added). Here, no party sought a stay. Thus, Justice BREYER's jurisdictional analysis is premised on two events that did not happen-a District Court ruling that was never issued denying a stay request that was never made. In short, Justice BREYER has written an opinion for a case other than the one before us.
Justice KAGAN offers her own interpretation of the contract, concludes that it unambiguously authorizes class arbitration, post , at ---- - ----, and criticizes us for "disregard[ing] the actual contract the parties signed," post , at ----. Justice SOTOMAYOR, on the other hand, concludes that the contract is ambiguous about class arbitration but criticizes us for treating the contract as ... ambiguous. Post, at ---- - ---- (dissenting opinion). Again, we simply follow this Court's ordinary approach, which "accord[s] great deference" to the courts of appeals in their interpretation of state law. Expressions Hair Design , 581 U.S., at ----, 137 S.Ct., at 1149 (quoting Pembaur v. Cincinnati , 475 U.S. 469, 484 n. 13, 106 S.Ct. 1292, 89 L.Ed.2d 452 (1986) (collecting cases)).
Varela and Justice KAGAN contend that our use of contra proferentem in Mastrobuono v. Shearson Lehman Hutton, Inc. , 514 U.S. 52, 57, 115 S.Ct. 1212, 131 L.Ed.2d 76 (1995), establishes that the rule is not preempted by the FAA. Brief for Respondent 33-35; post, at ---- (dissenting opinion). In Mastrobuono , however, we had no occasion to consider a conflict between the FAA and contra proferentem because both rules led to the same result. Our holding was primarily based on the FAA policy favoring arbitration, 514 U.S. at 62, 115 S.Ct. 1212, and only after establishing that did we apply contra proferentem , noting that the rule was "well suited to the facts of this case," id. , at 63, 115 S.Ct. 1212. See also EEOC v. Waffle House, Inc. , 534 U.S. 279, 293, n. 9, 122 S.Ct. 754, 151 L.Ed.2d 755 (2002) (explaining that Mastrobuono resolved an ambiguous provision by "read[ing] the agreement to favor arbitration under the FAA rules").
One could also reasonably fear that objections about unexpected applications will not be deployed neutrally. Often lurking just behind such objections resides a cynicism that Congress could not possibly have meant to protect a disfavored group. Take this Court's encounter with the Americans with Disabilities Act's directive that no " 'public entity' " can discriminate against any " 'qualified individual with a disability.' " Pennsylvania Dept. of Corrections v. Yeskey , 524 U.S. 206, 208, 118 S.Ct. 1952, 141 L.Ed.2d 215 (1998). Congress, of course, didn't list every public entity the statute would apply to. And no one batted an eye at its application to, say, post offices. But when the statute was applied to prisons , curiously, some demanded a closer look: Pennsylvania argued that "Congress did not 'envisio[n] that the ADA would be applied to state prisoners.' " Id ., at 211-212, 118 S.Ct. 1952. This Court emphatically rejected that view, explaining that, "in the context of an unambiguous statutory text," whether a specific application was anticipated by Congress "is irrelevant." Id. , at 212, 118 S.Ct. 1952. As Yeskey and today's cases exemplify, applying protective laws to groups that were politically unpopular at the time of the law's passage-whether prisoners in the 1990s or homosexual and transgender employees in the 1960s-often may be seen as unexpected. But to refuse enforcement just because of that, because the parties before us happened to be unpopular at the time of the law's passage, would not only require us to abandon our role as interpreters of statutes; it would tilt the scales of justice in favor of the strong or popular and neglect the promise that all persons are entitled to the benefit of the law's terms. Cf. post , at 1769 - 1773 (ALITO, J., dissenting); post, at 1833 - 1834 (KAVANAUGH, J., dissenting).
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, dissenting.
The questions answer themselves. Even if discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity could be squeezed into some arcane understanding of sex discrimination, the context in which Title VII was enacted would tell us that this is not what the statute's terms were understood to mean at that time. To paraphrase something Justice Scalia once wrote, "our job is not to scavenge the world of English usage to discover whether there is any possible meaning" of discrimination because of sex that might be broad enough to encompass discrimination because of sexual orientation or gender identity. Chisom v. Roemer , 501 U.S. 380, 410, 111 S.Ct. 2354, 115 L.Ed.2d 348 (1991) (dissenting opinion). Without strong evidence to the contrary (and there is none here), our job is to ascertain and apply the "ordinary meaning" of the statute. Ibid . And in 1964, ordinary Americans most certainly would not have understood Title VII to ban discrimination because of sexual orientation or gender identity.
Justices Douglas and Fortas thought that a homosexual is merely "one, who by some freak, is the product of an arrested development." Boutilier , 387 U.S. at 127, 87 S.Ct. 1563 (Douglas, J., dissenting); see also id. , at 125, 87 S.Ct. 1563 (Brennan, J., dissenting) (based on lower court dissent).
As a result, many Americans will not buy the novel interpretation unearthed and advanced by the Court today. Many will no doubt believe that the Court has unilaterally rewritten American vocabulary and American law-a "statutory amendment courtesy of unelected judges." Hively , 853 F.3d at 360 (Sykes, J., dissenting). Some will surmise that the Court succumbed to "the natural desire that beguiles judges along with other human beings into imposing their own views of goodness, truth, and justice upon others." Furman v. Georgia , 408 U.S. 238, 467, 92 S.Ct. 2726, 33 L.Ed.2d 346 (1972) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting).
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice BREYER, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Dissenting in Styers , then-Justice Hurwitz explained:
The second step is to determine whether the Commission creates the annotations in the "discharge" of its legislative "duties." Banks , 128 U.S. at 253, 9 S.Ct. 36. It does. Although the annotations are not enacted into law through bicameralism and presentment, the Commission's preparation of the annotations is under Georgia law an act of "legislative authority," Harrison Co. , 244 Ga. at 330, 260 S.E.2d at 34, and the annotations provide commentary and resources that the legislature has deemed relevant to understanding its laws. Georgia and Justice GINSBURG emphasize that the annotations do not purport to provide authoritative explanations of the law and largely summarize other materials, such as judicial decisions and law review articles. See post , at 1523 - 1524 (dissenting opinion). But that does not take them outside the exercise of legislative duty by the Commission and legislature. Just as we have held that the "statement of the case and the syllabus or head note" prepared by judges fall within the "work they perform in their capacity as judges," Banks , 128 U.S. at 253, 9 S.Ct. 36, so too annotations published by legislators alongside the statutory text fall within the work legislators perform in their capacity as legislators.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice ALITO joins, and with whom Justice BREYER joins as to all but Part II-A and footnote 6, dissenting.
Finally, concerns of fair notice, often recognized by this Court's precedents as an important component of due process, also may have animated the reasoning of these 19th-century cases. As one court put it, "[t]he decisions and opinions of the justices are the authorized expositions and interpretations of the laws, which are binding upon all the citizens.... Every citizen is presumed to know the law thus declared, and it needs no argument to show that justice requires that all should have free access to the opinions." Nash v. Lathrop , 142 Mass. 29, 35, 6 N.E. 559, 560 (1886) (cited in Banks , 128 U.S. at 253-254, 9 S.Ct. 36 ); see also American Soc. for Testing and Materials v. Public.Resource.Org, Inc. , 896 F.3d 437, 458-459 (CADC 2018) (Katsas, J., concurring).
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice BREYER joins, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS does not dispute that the Commission is an extension of the legislature; he instead faults us for highlighting the multiple features of the Commission that make clear that this is so. See post , at 1521 - 1522 (dissenting opinion).
For instance, this Court has not overruled Lemon v. Kurtzman , 403 U.S. 602, 91 S.Ct. 2135, 29 L.Ed.2d 745 (1971), which pronounced a test for evaluating Establishment Clause claims. But a reader would do well to carefully scrutinize the various opinions in American Legion v. American Humanist Assn. , 588 U.S. ----, 139 S.Ct. 2067, 204 L.Ed.2d 452 (2019), to understand the markedly different way that this precedent functions in our current jurisprudence compared to when it was first decided. Moreover, sometimes a separate writing takes on canonical status, like Justice Jackson's concurrence regarding the executive power in Youngstown Sheet & Tube Co. v. Sawyer , 343 U.S. 579, 634-638, 72 S.Ct. 863, 96 L.Ed. 1153 (1952) (opinion concurring in judgment and opinion of the Court); see also Katz v. United States , 389 U.S. 347, 360-361, 88 S.Ct. 507, 19 L.Ed.2d 576 (1967) (Harlan, J., concurring) (reasonable expectation of privacy Fourth Amendment test). Still other times, the reasoning in an opinion for less than a majority of the Court provides the explicit basis for a later majority's holding. See, e.g. , McKinney v. Arizona , 589 U.S. ----, ----, 140 S.Ct. 702, 707-708, 206 L.Ed.2d 69 (2020) (discussing Ring v. Arizona , 536 U.S. 584, 612, 122 S.Ct. 2428, 153 L.Ed.2d 556 (2002) (Scalia J., concurring)); Estelle v. Gamble , 429 U.S. 97, 102, 97 S.Ct. 285, 50 L.Ed.2d 251 (1976) (incorporating into the majority the Eighth Amendment "evolving standards of decency" test first announced in Trop v. Dulles , 356 U.S. 86, 101, 78 S.Ct. 590, 2 L.Ed.2d 630 (1958) (plurality opinion)). Even " 'comments in [a] dissenting opinion,' " ante , at 1511, sometimes reemerge as the foundational reasoning in a majority opinion. See, e.g. , Franchise Tax Bd. of Cal. v. Hyatt , 587 U.S. ----, 139 S.Ct. 1485, 203 L.Ed.2d 768 (2019) (discussing Nevada v. Hall , 440 U.S. 410, 433-439, 99 S.Ct. 1182, 59 L.Ed.2d 416 (1979) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting)); Lawrence v. Texas , 539 U.S. 558, 578, 123 S.Ct. 2472, 156 L.Ed.2d 508 (2003) ("Justice STEVENS' [dissenting] analysis, in our view, should have been controlling in Bowers [v. Hardwick , 478 U.S. 186, 106 S.Ct. 2841, 92 L.Ed.2d 140 (1986),] and should control here"). These examples, and myriad more, demonstrate that the majority treats the role of separate judicial opinions in an overly simplistic fashion.
This Court first adopted Title VII's motivating factor test in Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins , 490 U.S. 228, 109 S.Ct. 1775, 104 L.Ed.2d 268 (1989). There, a plurality and two Justices concurring in the judgment held that a Title VII plaintiff doesn't have to prove but-for causation; instead, it's enough to show that discrimination was a motivating factor in the defendant's decision. Id. , at 249-250, 109 S.Ct. 1775 (plurality opinion); see also id., at 258-259, 109 S.Ct. 1775 (White, J., concurring in judgment); id., at 268-269, 109 S.Ct. 1775 (O'Connor, J., concurring in judgment). Once a plaintiff meets this lesser standard, the plurality continued, the defendant may defeat liability by establishing that it would have made the same decision even if it had not taken the plaintiff 's race (or other protected trait) into account. In essence, Price Waterhouse took the burden of proving but-for causation from the plaintiff and handed it to the defendant as an affirmative defense. Id., at 246, 109 S.Ct. 1775.
Justice GINSBURG, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice KAGAN joins, dissenting.
True, petitioners expected to be eligible for scholarships under the legislature's program, and to use those scholarships at a religious school. And true, the Montana court's decision disappointed those expectations along with those of parents who send their children to secular private schools. But, as Justice SOTOMAYOR observes, see post, at 2293 (dissenting opinion), this Court has consistently refused to treat neutral government action as unconstitutional solely because it fails to benefit religious exercise. See Sherbert , 374 U.S. at 412, 83 S.Ct. 1790 (Douglas, J., concurring) ("[T]he Free Exercise Clause is written in terms of what the government cannot do to the individual, not in terms of what the individual can exact from the government.").
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice KAGAN joins as to Part I, dissenting.
Such a development, of course, cannot by itself establish an early American tradition. Justice SOTOMAYOR questions our reliance on aid provided during the same era by the Freedmen's Bureau, post , at 2297 (dissenting opinion), but we see no inconsistency in recognizing that such evidence may reinforce an early practice but cannot create one. In addition, many of the no-aid provisions belong to a more checkered tradition shared with the Blaine Amendment of the 1870s. That proposal-which Congress nearly passed-would have added to the Federal Constitution a provision similar to the state no-aid provisions, prohibiting States from aiding "sectarian" schools. See Mitchell v. Helms , 530 U.S. 793, 828, 120 S.Ct. 2530, 147 L.Ed.2d 660 (2000) (plurality opinion). "[I]t was an open secret that 'sectarian' was code for 'Catholic.' " Ibid. ; see Jorgenson, supra , at 70. The Blaine Amendment was "born of bigotry" and "arose at a time of pervasive hostility to the Catholic Church and to Catholics in general"; many of its state counterparts have a similarly "shameful pedigree." Mitchell , 530 U.S. at 828-829, 120 S.Ct. 2530 (plurality opinion); see Jorgenson, supra , at 69-70, 216; Jeffries & Ryan, A Political History of the Establishment Clause, 100 Mich. L. Rev. 279, 301-305 (2001). The no-aid provisions of the 19th century hardly evince a tradition that should inform our understanding of the Free Exercise Clause.
Two dissenters would chart new courses. Justice SOTOMAYOR would grant the government "some room" to "single ... out" religious entities "for exclusion," based on what she views as "the interests embodied in the Religion Clauses." Post, at 2295 - 2296, 2296 (quoting Trinity Lutheran , 582 U.S., at ----, ----, 137 S.Ct., at 2031 (SOTOMAYOR, J., dissenting)). Justice BREYER, building on his solo opinion in Trinity Lutheran , would adopt a "flexible, context-specific approach" that "may well vary" from case to case. Post , at 2288, 2290; see Trinity Lutheran , 582 U.S., at ----, 137 S.Ct., at 2026-2027 (BREYER, J., concurring in judgment). As best we can tell, courts applying this approach would contemplate the particular benefit and restriction at issue and discern their relationship to religion and society, taking into account "context and consequences measured in light of [the] purposes" of the Religion Clauses. Post , at 2291 - 2292 (quoting Van Orden v. Perry , 545 U.S. 677, 700, 125 S.Ct. 2854, 162 L.Ed.2d 607 (2005) (BREYER, J., concurring in judgment)). What is clear is that Justice BREYER would afford much freer rein to judges than our current regime, arguing that "there is 'no test-related substitute for the exercise of legal judgment.' " Post , at 2291 (quoting Van Orden , 545 U.S. at 700, 125 S.Ct. 2854 (opinion of BREYER, J.)).
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins, concurring.
Historical evidence suggests that many advocates for this separationist view were originally motivated by hostility toward certain disfavored religions. See P. Hamburger, Separation of Church and State 391-454 (2002). And this Court's adoption of a separationist interpretation has itself sometimes bordered on religious hostility. Justice Black, well known for his role in formulating the Court's modern Establishment Clause jurisprudence, once described Catholic petitioners as "powerful sectarian religious propagandists" "looking toward complete domination and supremacy" of their "preferences and prejudices." Board of Ed. of Central School Dist. No. 1 v. Allen , 392 U.S. 236, 251, 88 S.Ct. 1923, 20 L.Ed.2d 1060 (1968) (dissenting opinion). Other Members of the Court have characterized religions as "divisive forces." Edwards v. Aguillard , 482 U.S. 578, 584, 107 S.Ct. 2573, 96 L.Ed.2d 510 (1987) (internal quotation marks omitted); Board of Ed. of Westside Community Schools (Dist. 66) v. Mergens , 496 U.S. 226, 287, 110 S.Ct. 2356, 110 L.Ed.2d 191 (1990) (Stevens, J., dissenting) (internal quotation marks omitted); Illinois ex rel. McCollum v. Board of Ed. of School Dist. No. 71, Champaign Cty. , 333 U.S. 203, 231, 68 S.Ct. 461, 92 L.Ed. 649 (1948) (Frankfurter, J., concurring). And the Court once described a statute permitting employees to request accommodations to avoid work on the Sabbath as "arm[ing]" religious employees with the "absolute and unqualified right" to pursue their religion "over all other ... interests." Estate of Thornton v. Caldor, Inc. , 472 U.S. 703, 709-711, 105 S.Ct. 2914, 86 L.Ed.2d 557 (1985). The siren song of religion is apparently so strong that we once held that public school teachers cannot provide assistance at parochial schools, lest they "subtly (or overtly) conform their instruction to the environment in which they teach." School Dist. of Grand Rapids v. Ball , 473 U.S. 373, 388, 105 S.Ct. 3216, 87 L.Ed.2d 267 (1985), overruled by Agostini v. Felton , 521 U.S. 203, 235, 117 S.Ct. 1997, 138 L.Ed.2d 391 (1997). In the Court's view, "[t]he 'atmosphere' of a Catholic school ha[d] such power to influence the unsuspecting mind that it may move even public school ... specialists to 'conform'-though their only contact with the school is to walk down its halls." McConnell, Religious Freedom at a Crossroads, 59 U. Chi. L. Rev. 115, 122 (1992).
Justice SOTOMAYOR argues that the Montana Supreme Court "expressly declined to reach any federal issue." Post , at 2295 (dissenting opinion). Not so. As noted, supra , at 2253, the Montana Supreme Court recognized that certain applications of the no-aid provision could "violate the Free Exercise Clause." 393 Mont. 446, 468, 435 P.3d 603, 614 (2018). But the Court expressly concluded that "this is not one of those cases." Ibid.
Justice BREYER sees "no meaningful difference" between concerns animating bans on support for clergy and bans on support for religious schools. Post , at 2286. But evidently early American governments did. See supra, at 2258. Justice BREYER contests particular examples but acknowledges that some bans on clergy support did not bar certain "sponsorship" of religious schools. Post , at 2286. And, central to the issue here, he certainly does not identify a consistent early tradition, of the sort invoked in Locke , against support for religious schools. Virginia's opposition to establishing university theology professorships and chartering theological seminaries, see ibid. , do not fit the bill. Buckley, After Disestablishment: Thomas Jefferson's Wall of Separation in Antebellum Virginia, 61 J. So. Hist. 445, 452-453 (1995). Justice BREYER also invokes Madison's objections to the Virginia Assessment Bill, post , at 2285 - 2286, but Madison objected in part because the Bill provided special support to certain churches and clergy, thereby "violat[ing] equality by subjecting some to peculiar burdens." Memorial and Remonstrance Against Religious Assessments, Art. 4, reprinted in Everson , 330 U.S. at 66, 67 S.Ct. 504 (appendix to dissenting opinion of Rutledge, J.); see V. Muñoz, God and the Founders: Madison, Washington, and Jefferson 21-22, 27 (2009). It is far from clear that the same objections extend to programs that provide equal support to all private primary and secondary schools. If anything, excluding religious schools from such programs would appear to impose the "peculiar burdens" feared by Madison.
Justice SOTOMAYOR worries that, in light of our decision, the Montana Supreme Court must "order the State to recreate" a scholarship program that "no longer exists." Post , at 2295 (dissenting opinion). But it was the Montana Supreme Court that eliminated the program, in the decision below, which remains under review. Our reversal of that decision simply restores the status quo established by the Montana Legislature before the Court's error of federal law. We do not consider any alterations the Legislature may choose to make in the future.
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice BREYER and Justice KAGAN join, concurring.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, concurring in the judgment.
The plurality feints toward this doctrine, claiming that third-party standing for abortionists is well settled by our precedents. But, ultimately, it dodges the question, claiming that Louisiana's standing challenge was waived below. Both assertions are erroneous. First, there is no controlling precedent that sets forth the blanket rule advocated for by plaintiffs here-i.e. , abortionists may challenge health and safety regulations based solely on their role in the abortion process. Second, I agree with Justice ALITO that Louisiana did not waive its standing challenge below. Post , at 2165 - 2166 (dissenting opinion).
The first-and only-time the Court squarely addressed this question with a reasoned decision was in Singleton v. Wulff , 428 U.S. 106, 96 S.Ct. 2868, 49 L.Ed.2d 826 (1976). In that case, a fractured Court concluded that two abortionists had standing to challenge a State's refusal to provide Medicaid reimbursements for abortions. Perfunctorily applying this Court's requirements for third-party standing, Justice Blackmun, joined by three other Justices, asserted that abortionists generally had standing to litigate their clients' rights. Id. , at 113-118, 96 S.Ct. 2868 (plurality opinion). Justice Stevens concurred on considerably narrower grounds, reasoning that the abortionists had standing because they had a financial stake in the outcome of the litigation and sought to vindicate their own constitutional rights as well. Id., at 121, 96 S.Ct. 2868 (opinion concurring in part). Notably, Justice Stevens declined to join the plurality's discussion of third-party standing, explaining that he was "not sure whether [that analysis] would, or should, sustain the doctors' standing, apart from" their own legal rights and financial interests being at stake in that specific case. Id., at 122, 96 S.Ct. 2868. The four remaining Justices dissented in part, concluding that the abortionists lacked standing to litigate the rights of their clients. Id., at 122-131, 96 S.Ct. 2868 (Powell, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). Because Justice Stevens' opinion "concurred in the judgmen[t] on the narrowest grounds," it is the controlling opinion regarding abortionists' third-party standing. Marks v. United States , 430 U.S. 188, 193, 97 S.Ct. 990, 51 L.Ed.2d 260 (1977).
Even if the plaintiffs had standing, the Court would still lack the authority to enjoin Louisiana's law, which represents a constitutionally valid exercise of the State's traditional police powers. The plurality and THE CHIEF JUSTICE claim that the Court's judgment is dictated by "our precedents," particularly Whole Woman's Health . Ante , at 2131 - 2132 (plurality opinion); see also ante, at 2133 - 2134, 2138 - 2142 (ROBERTS, C. J., concurring in judgment). For the detailed reasons explained by Justice ALITO, this is not true. Post , at 2153 - 2165 (dissenting opinion).
As Justice Black observed in his dissent, this general "right of privacy" was never before considered a constitutional guarantee protecting citizens from governmental intrusion. Id., at 508-510, 85 S.Ct. 1678. Rather, the concept was one of tort law, championed by Samuel Warren and the future Justice Louis Brandeis in their 1890 Harvard Law Review article entitled, " The Right to Privacy." 4 Harv. L. Rev. 193. Over 20 years after the Fourteenth Amendment was ratified and a century after the Bill of Rights was adopted, Warren and Brandeis were among the first to advocate for this privacy right in the context of tort relief for those whose personal information and private affairs were exploited by others. Id., at 193, 195-196, 214-220. By "exalting a phrase ... used in discussing grounds for tort relief, to the level of a constitutional rule," the Court arrogated to itself the "power to invalidate any legislative act which [it] find[s] irrational, unreasonable[,] or offensive" as an impermissible "interfere[nce] with 'privacy.' " Griswold, supra , at 510, n. 1, 511, 85 S.Ct. 1678 (Black, J., dissenting).
Moreover, the fact that no five Justices can agree on the proper interpretation of our precedents today evinces that our abortion jurisprudence remains in a state of utter entropy. Since the Court decided Roe , Members of this Court have decried the unworkability of our abortion case law and repeatedly called for course corrections of varying degrees. See, e.g., 410 U.S. at 171-178, 93 S.Ct. 705 (Rehnquist, J., dissenting); Doe v. Bolton , 410 U.S. 179, 221-223, 93 S.Ct. 739, 35 L.Ed.2d 201 (1973) (White, J., dissenting); Akron v. Akron Center for Reproductive Health, Inc. , 462 U.S. 416, 452-466, 103 S.Ct. 2481, 76 L.Ed.2d 687 (1983) (O'Connor, J., dissenting); Thornburgh v. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists , 476 U.S. 747, 785-797, 106 S.Ct. 2169, 90 L.Ed.2d 779 (1986) (White, J., dissenting); Webster v. Reproductive Health Services , 492 U.S. 490, 532-537, 109 S.Ct. 3040, 106 L.Ed.2d 410 (1989) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment); Casey , 505 U.S. at 944-966, 112 S.Ct. 2791 (Rehnquist, C. J., concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part); id., at 979-1002, 112 S.Ct. 2791 (Scalia, J., concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part); Stenberg , 530 U.S. at 953-956, 120 S.Ct. 2597 (Scalia, J., dissenting); id., at 980-983, 120 S.Ct. 2597 (THOMAS, J., dissenting); Whole Woman's Health , 579 U. S., at ---- - ----, 136 S.Ct., at (THOMAS, J., dissenting) (slip op., at 5-11). In Casey , the majority claimed to clarify this "jurisprudence of doubt," 505 U.S. at 844, 112 S.Ct. 2791, but our decisions in the decades since then have only demonstrated the folly of that assertion, see Stenberg , 530 U.S. at 953-956, 120 S.Ct. 2597 (Scalia, J., dissenting); id., at 960-979, 120 S.Ct. 2597 (Kennedy, J., dissenting); Whole Woman's Health , supra , at ---- - ----, 136 S.Ct. 2292 (THOMAS, J., dissenting) (slip op., at 5-11). They serve as further evidence that this Court's abortion jurisprudence has failed to deliver the " 'principled and intelligible' " development of the law that stare decisis purports to secure. Ante, at 2134 (opinion of ROBERTS, C. J.) (quoting Vasquez v. Hillery , 474 U.S. 254, 265, 106 S.Ct. 617, 88 L.Ed.2d 598 (1986) ).
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins, with whom Justice THOMAS joins except as to Parts III-C and IV-F, and with whom Justice KAVANAUGH joins as to Parts I, II, and III, dissenting.
Because the plurality adheres to the balancing test adopted in Whole Woman's Health , it considers whether the Louisiana law helps to protect the health of women seeking abortions, and it concludes that "nothing in the record indicates that the background vetting for admitting privileges adds significantly to the vetting that the State Board of Medical Examiners already provides." Ante , at 2131. THE CHIEF JUSTICE seems to agree, ante , at 2140 - 2141 (opinion concurring in judgment), although it is unclear why this issue matters under the test he favors.
Nor can the second, which requires that there be a hindrance to the ability of the third party to bring suit. See Kowalski , 543 U.S. at 130, 125 S.Ct. 564. The plurality opinion in Singleton v. Wulff , 428 U.S. 106, 117, 96 S.Ct. 2868, 49 L.Ed.2d 826 (1976), found that women seeking abortions were hindered from bringing suit, but the reasoning in that opinion is hard to defend. The opinion identified two purported obstacles to suits by women wishing to obtain abortions-the women's desire to protect their privacy and the prospect of mootness. Ibid . But as Justice Powell said at the time, these "alleged 'obstacles' ... are chimerical." Id ., at 126, 96 S.Ct. 2868 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part).
The practice of creating by federal law local offices for the Territories and District of Columbia that are filled through election or local executive appointment has continued unabated for more than two centuries. See, e.g. , ibid . (Northwest Territories local offices filled by election); Act of Apr. 7, 1798, § 3, 1 Stat. 550 (Mississippi, same); Act of May 7, 1800, § 2, 2 Stat. 59 (Indiana, same); Act of May 15, 1820, § 3, 3 Stat. 584 (District of Columbia, same); Act of Apr. 30, 1900, § 13, 31 Stat. 144 (Hawaii, same); Act of Aug. 24, 1912, § 4, 37 Stat. 513 (Alaska, same); Act of Aug. 23, 1968, § 4, 82 Stat. 837 (Virgin Islands, same); Act of Sept. 11, 1968, Pub. L. 90-497, § 1, 82 Stat. 842 (Guam, same); Act of May 4, 1812, § 3, 2 Stat. 723 (D. C. mayor appoints "all offices"); Act of June 4, 1812, § 2, 2 Stat. 744 (Missouri Governor, similar); Act of Mar. 2, 1819, § 3, 3 Stat. 494 (Arkansas, similar); Act of June 6, 1900, § 2, 31 Stat. 322 (Alaska, similar); Act of Sept. 11, 1968, § 1, 82 Stat. 843 (Guam, similar). Like Justice THOMAS, post, at 1668 (opinion concurring in judgment), we think the practice of the First Congress is strong evidence of the original meaning of the Constitution. We find this subsequent history similarly illuminates the text's meaning.
In his concurring opinion, Justice THOMAS criticizes the inquiry we set out-whether an officer's duties are primarily local or primarily federal-as too "amorphous," post , at 1670. But we think this is the test established by the Constitution's text, as illuminated by historical practice. And we cannot see how Congress could avoid the strictures of the Appointments Clause by adding to a federal officer's other obligations a large number of local duties. Indeed, we think that our test, tied as it is to both the text and the history of the Appointments Clause, is more rigorous than the bare inquiry into the "nature" of the officer's authority that Justice THOMAS proposes, and we believe it is more faithful to the Clause's original meaning. Ibid.
Finally, as Justice SOTOMAYOR recognizes, post , at 1674 (opinion concurring in judgment), we need not, and therefore do not, decide questions concerning the application of the Federal Relations Act and Public Law 600. No party has argued that those Acts bear any significant relation to the answer to the Appointments Clause question now before us.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment.
In contrast, Congress did not revise the process for appointing "magistrates and other civil officers," who remained subject to appointment by the Governor. 1 Stat. 51, n. (a ), and 53. The "magistrates and other civil officers" of the Northwest Territory included justices of the peace, clerks of the court, sheriffs, coroners, surveyors, and notaries. 3 The Territorial Papers of the United States: The Territory Northwest of the River Ohio, 1787-1803, pp. 304-307 (C. Carter ed. 1934). If these officials were exercising a statutory duty under the powers of the National Government, they would have certainly been considered "Officers of the United States" under the Appointments Clause. See Mascott 484-507, 510-515. "The Founders considered individuals to be officers even if they performed only ministerial statutory duties-including recordkeepers, clerks, and tidewaiters (individuals who watched goods land at a customhouse)." Lucia , 585 U.S., at ----, 138 S.Ct., at 2057 (THOMAS, J., concurring). But "the powers and duties of magistrates and other civil officers [were] regulated and defined by the [territorial] assembly," 1 Stat. 51, n. (a ), and therefore were necessarily exercised pursuant to Article IV, see supra, at 1666 - 1668. It is evident that the First Congress did not consider these officials to be "Officers of the United States," because it allowed appointment by an official who is not the "hea[d] of a department." See United States v. Germaine , 99 U.S. 508, 510, 25 L.Ed. 482 (1879).
Justice SOTOMAYOR, concurring in the judgment.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice ALITO joins, dissenting.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice KAGAN joins, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins, dissenting.
Justice KAVANAUGH believes that the Court's opinion provides enough guidance when it states that "[t]ime and distance will be the most important factors in most cases, but not necessarily every case ," ante, at 1477 (majority opinion) (emphasis added). See ante, at 1478 (concurring opinion). His hope for guidance appears misplaced. For all we know, these factors may not be the most important in 49 percent of cases. The majority's nonexhaustive seven-factor test "may aid in identifying relevant facts for analysis, but-like most multifactor tests-it leaves courts adrift once those facts have been identified." Dietz v. Bouldin , 579 U.S. ----, ----, 136 S.Ct. 1885, 1898, 195 L.Ed.2d 161 (2016) (THOMAS, J., dissenting); see also Scalia, The Rule of Law as a Law of Rules, 56 U. Chi. L. Rev. 1175, 1186-1187 (1989) (noting that "when balancing is the mode of analysis, not much general guidance may be drawn from the opinion" and arguing that "totality of the circumstances tests and balancing modes of analysis" should "be avoided where possible").
Justice THOMAS describes his preferred holding in similar terms: "[A] permit is required only when a point source discharges pollutants directly into navigable waters." Ante , at 1479 (dissenting opinion). But I take Justice THOMAS's opinion to foreclose liability in one situation where I believe a permit would be required: a discharge from multiple, linked point sources. In my view, a permit is required in that instance because a pollutant would ultimately be added to navigable waters directly from a point source.
In short, at least one and perhaps both of the lines of lower court cases to which Justice Scalia referred are fully consistent with the interpretation set out in this opinion. The same is true of his statement, discussed by Justice KAVANAUGH, ante , at 1478 - 1479 (concurring opinion), that the Clean Water Act "does not forbid the 'addition of any pollutant directly to navigable waters from any point source.' " 547 U.S. at 743, 126 S.Ct. 2208. As noted, Justice Scalia's opinion is open to the possibility that a permit is required if point source A discharges into point source B, and point source B then discharges into covered waters. Thus, his opinion apparently regards that situation as involving an indirect discharge. I would describe that discharge as direct because point source B discharges directly into covered waters, but the difference is purely semantic.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice BREYER and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.
Justice ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE, Justice BREYER, and Justice KAVANAUGH join, dissenting.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice BREYER joins, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
Thirteen years later, in Davis v. Bandemer , we addressed a claim that Indiana Republicans had cracked and packed Democrats in violation of the Equal Protection Clause. 478 U.S. 109, 116-117, 106 S.Ct. 2797, 92 L.Ed.2d 85 (1986) (plurality opinion). A majority of the Court agreed that the case was justiciable, but the Court splintered over the proper standard to apply. Four Justices would have required proof of "intentional discrimination against an identifiable political group and an actual discriminatory effect on that group." Id. , at 127, 106 S.Ct. 2797. Two Justices would have focused on "whether the boundaries of the voting districts have been distorted deliberately and arbitrarily to achieve illegitimate ends." Id. , at 165, 106 S.Ct. 2797 (Powell, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). Three Justices, meanwhile, would have held that the Equal Protection Clause simply "does not supply judicially manageable standards for resolving purely political gerrymandering claims." Id. , at 147, 106 S.Ct. 2797 (O'Connor, J., concurring in judgment). At the end of the day, there was "no 'Court' for a standard that properly should be applied in determining whether a challenged redistricting plan is an unconstitutional partisan political gerrymander." Id. , at 185, n. 25, 106 S.Ct. 2797 (opinion of Powell, J.). In any event, the Court held that the plaintiffs had failed to show that the plan violated the Constitution.
Eighteen years later, in Vieth , the plaintiffs complained that Pennsylvania's legislature "ignored all traditional redistricting criteria, including the preservation of local government boundaries," in order to benefit Republican congressional candidates. 541 U.S. at 272-273, 124 S.Ct. 1769 (plurality opinion) (brackets omitted). Justice Scalia wrote for a four-Justice plurality. He would have held that the plaintiffs' claims were nonjusticiable because there was no "judicially discernible and manageable standard" for deciding them. Id. , at 306, 124 S.Ct. 1769. Justice Kennedy, concurring in the judgment, noted "the lack of comprehensive and neutral principles for drawing electoral boundaries [and] the absence of rules to limit and confine judicial intervention." Id. , at 306-307, 124 S.Ct. 1769. He nonetheless left open the possibility that "in another case a standard might emerge." Id. , at 312, 124 S.Ct. 1769. Four Justices dissented.
In considering whether partisan gerrymandering claims are justiciable, we are mindful of Justice Kennedy's counsel in Vieth : Any standard for resolving such claims must be grounded in a "limited and precise rationale" and be "clear, manageable, and politically neutral." 541 U.S. at 306-308, 124 S.Ct. 1769 (opinion concurring in judgment). An important reason for those careful constraints is that, as a Justice with extensive experience in state and local politics put it, "[t]he opportunity to control the drawing of electoral boundaries through the legislative process of apportionment is a critical and traditional part of politics in the United States." Bandemer , 478 U.S. at 145, 106 S.Ct. 2797 (opinion of O'Connor, J.). See Gaffney , 412 U.S. at 749, 93 S.Ct. 2321 (observing that districting implicates "fundamental 'choices about the nature of representation' " (quoting Burns v. Richardson , 384 U.S. 73, 92, 86 S.Ct. 1286, 16 L.Ed.2d 376 (1966) )). An expansive standard requiring "the correction of all election district lines drawn for partisan reasons would commit federal and state courts to unprecedented intervention in the American political process," Vieth , 541 U.S. at 306, 124 S.Ct. 1769 (opinion of Kennedy, J.).
Or perhaps fairness should be measured by adherence to "traditional" districting criteria, such as maintaining political subdivisions, keeping communities of interest together, and protecting incumbents. See Brief for Bipartisan Group of Current and Former Members of the House of Representatives as Amici Curiae ; Brief for Professor Wesley Pegden et al. as Amici Curiae in No. 18-422. But protecting incumbents, for example, enshrines a particular partisan distribution. And the "natural political geography" of a State-such as the fact that urban electoral districts are often dominated by one political party-can itself lead to inherently packed districts. As Justice Kennedy has explained, traditional criteria such as compactness and contiguity "cannot promise political neutrality when used as the basis for relief. Instead, it seems, a decision under these standards would unavoidably have significant political effect, whether intended or not." Vieth , 541 U.S. at 308-309, 124 S.Ct. 1769 (opinion concurring in judgment). See id. , at 298, 124 S.Ct. 1769 (plurality opinion) ("[P]acking and cracking, whether intentional or no, are quite consistent with adherence to compactness and respect for political subdivision lines").
Justice KAGAN, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice BREYER, and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.
Partisan gerrymandering of the kind before us not only subverts democracy (as if that weren't bad enough). It violates individuals' constitutional rights as well. That statement is not the lonesome cry of a dissenting Justice. This Court has recognized extreme partisan gerrymandering as such a violation for many years.
Justice KAVANAUGH, with whom Justice THOMAS and Justice ALITO join, and with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE joins as to all but Part II-C, dissenting.
In short, the Court in Johnson and Dimaya employed something akin to the constitutional avoidance doctrine to read the statutes at issue to avoid practical and Sixth Amendment problems. In the words of Justice THOMAS, the "categorical approach was never really about the best reading of the text." Dimaya , 584 U.S., at ----, 138 S.Ct., at 1256 (dissenting opinion). As Judge Raggi has perceptively stated: "[C]onstitutional avoidance informed the original categorical-approach mandate." United States v. Barrett , 903 F.3d 166, 179 (CA2 2018).
It is an elementary principle of statutory interpretation that an ambiguous statute must be interpreted, whenever possible, to avoid unconstitutionality. See generally Scalia, Reading Law: The Interpretation of Legal Texts, at 247-251; Eskridge, Interpreting Law: A Primer on How to Read Statutes and the Constitution, at 317-322. That uncontroversial principle of statutory interpretation dates back to the Founding era. See Mossman v. Higginson , 4 U.S. (4 Dall.) 12, 14, 1 L.Ed. 720 (1800). As Justice THOMAS has explained, the traditional doctrine of constitutional avoidance commands "courts, when faced with two plausible constructions of a statute-one constitutional and the other unconstitutional-to choose the constitutional reading." Clark , 543 U.S. at 395, 125 S.Ct. 716 (dissenting opinion). This Court's duty is "not to destroy the Act if we can, but to construe it, if consistent with the will of Congress, so as to comport with constitutional limitations." Civil Service Comm'n v. Letter Carriers , 413 U.S. 548, 571, 93 S.Ct. 2880, 37 L.Ed.2d 796 (1973). In discharging that duty, "every reasonable construction must be resorted to, in order to save a statute from unconstitutionality." Hooper , 155 U.S. at 657, 15 S.Ct. 207.
In countless cases for more than 200 years, this Court has recognized the principle that courts should construe ambiguous laws to be consistent with the Constitution. See, e.g. , McDonnell v. United States , 579 U.S. ----, ---- - ----, 136 S.Ct. 2355, 2372-2373, 195 L.Ed.2d 639 (2016) ; Skilling , 561 U.S. at 405-409, 130 S.Ct. 2896 ; Clark , 543 U.S. at 380-382, 125 S.Ct. 716 ; Edmond v. United States , 520 U.S. 651, 658, 117 S.Ct. 1573, 137 L.Ed.2d 917 (1997) ; Concrete Pipe & Products of Cal., Inc. v. Construction Laborers Pension Trust for Southern Cal. , 508 U.S. 602, 628-630, 113 S.Ct. 2264, 124 L.Ed.2d 539 (1993) ; New York v. United States , 505 U.S. 144, 170, 112 S.Ct. 2408, 120 L.Ed.2d 120 (1992) ; Rust v. Sullivan , 500 U.S. 173, 190-191, 111 S.Ct. 1759, 114 L.Ed.2d 233 (1991) ; Public Citizen v. Department of Justice , 491 U.S. 440, 465-467, 109 S.Ct. 2558, 105 L.Ed.2d 377 (1989) ; Communications Workers v. Beck , 487 U.S. 735, 762, 108 S.Ct. 2641, 101 L.Ed.2d 634 (1988) ; Edward J. DeBartolo Corp. v. Florida Gulf Coast Building & Constr. Trades Council , 485 U.S. 568, 575-578, 108 S.Ct. 1392, 99 L.Ed.2d 645 (1988) ; St. Martin Evangelical Lutheran Church v. South Dakota , 451 U.S. 772, 780-781, 101 S.Ct. 2142, 68 L.Ed.2d 612 (1981) ; Letter Carriers , 413 U.S. at 571, 93 S.Ct. 2880 ; Machinists v. Street , 367 U.S. 740, 749-750, 81 S.Ct. 1784, 6 L.Ed.2d 1141 (1961) ; Ashwander v. TVA , 297 U.S. 288, 348, 56 S.Ct. 466, 80 L.Ed. 688 (1936) (Brandeis, J., concurring); ICC v. Oregon-Washington R. & Nav. Co. , 288 U.S. 14, 40-42, 53 S.Ct. 266, 77 L.Ed. 588 (1933) ; Crowell v. Benson , 285 U.S. 22, 62-63, 52 S.Ct. 285, 76 L.Ed. 598 (1932) ; Lucas v. Alexander , 279 U.S. 573, 577-578, 49 S.Ct. 426, 73 L.Ed. 851 (1929) ; Richmond Screw Anchor Co. v. United States , 275 U.S. 331, 345-346, 48 S.Ct. 194, 72 L.Ed. 303 (1928) ;
Justice ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE and Justice GORSUCH join, concurring.
Our dissenting colleagues appear to endorse something like this final argument. They seem to agree that the law doesn't demand proof of "substantial" or "competitive" harm, but they think it would be a good idea to require a showing of some harm. Neither side, however, has advocated for such an understanding of the statute's terms. And our colleagues' brief brush with the statutory text doesn't help; they cite exclusively from specialized dictionary definitions lifted from the national security classification context that have no bearing on Exemption 4. Really, our colleagues' submission boils down to a policy argument about the benefits of broad disclosure. But as Justice BREYER has noted, when Congress enacted FOIA it sought a "workable balance" between disclosure and other governmental interests-interests that may include providing private parties with sufficient assurances about the treatment of their proprietary information so they will cooperate in federal programs and supply the government with information vital to its work. See Milner , 562 U.S. at 589, 131 S.Ct. 1259 (dissenting opinion) (arguing for a broad exemption from FOIA disclosure obligations to honor a "workable balance" between disclosure and privacy).
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice KAGAN and Justice GORSUCH join, dissenting.
Justice KAGAN, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins, concurring.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice ALITO joins, dissenting.
The District Court's remand thus presented DHS with a choice: rest on the Duke Memorandum while elaborating on its prior reasoning, or issue a new rescission bolstered by new reasons absent from the Duke Memorandum. Secretary Nielsen took the first path. Rather than making a new decision, she "decline[d] to disturb the Duke memorandum's rescission" and instead "provide[d] further explanation" for that action. App. to Pet. for Cert. 121a. Indeed, the Government's subsequent request for reconsideration described the Nielsen Memorandum as "additional explanation for [Duke's] decision" and asked the District Court to "leave in place [Duke's] September 5, 2017 decision to rescind the DACA policy." Motion to Revise Order in No. 17-cv-1907 etc. (D DC), pp. 2, 19. Contrary to the position of the Government before this Court, and of Justice KAVANAUGH in dissent, post , at 1933 (opinion concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part), the Nielsen Memorandum was by its own terms not a new rule implementing a new policy.
Justice Holmes famously wrote that "[m]en must turn square corners when they deal with the Government." Rock Island, A. & L. R. Co. v. United States , 254 U.S. 141, 143, 41 S.Ct. 55, 65 L.Ed. 188 (1920). But it is also true, particularly when so much is at stake, that "the Government should turn square corners in dealing with the people." St. Regis Paper Co. v. United States , 368 U.S. 208, 229, 82 S.Ct. 289, 7 L.Ed.2d 240 (1961) (Black, J., dissenting). The basic rule here is clear: An agency must defend its actions based on the reasons it gave when it acted. This is not the case for cutting corners to allow DHS to rely upon reasons absent from its original decision.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, concurring in part, concurring in the judgment in part, and dissenting in part.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice ALITO and Justice GORSUCH join, concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part.
The lack of support for the majority's position is hardly surprising in light of our Constitution's separation of powers. No court can compel Executive Branch officials to exceed their congressionally delegated powers by continuing a program that was void ab initio . Cf. Clinton v. City of New York , 524 U.S. 417, 118 S.Ct. 2091, 141 L.Ed.2d 393 (1998) ; INS v. Chadha , 462 U.S. 919, 103 S.Ct. 2764, 77 L.Ed.2d 317 (1983) ; see also EPA v. EME Homer City Generation, L. P. , 572 U.S. 489, 542, n. 5, 134 S.Ct. 1584, 188 L.Ed.2d 775 (2014) (Scalia, J., dissenting); Public Citizen v. Department of Justice , 491 U.S. 440, 487, 109 S.Ct. 2558, 105 L.Ed.2d 377 (1989) (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment). In reviewing agency action, our role is to ensure that Executive Branch officials do not transgress the proper bounds of their authority, Arlington , 569 U.S. at 327, 133 S.Ct. 1863 (ROBERTS, C.J., dissenting), not to perpetuate a decision to unlawfully wield power in direct contravention of the enabling statute's clear limits, see UARG , 573 U.S. at 327-328, 134 S.Ct. 2427 ; Barnhart v. Sigmon Coal Co. , 534 U.S. 438, 462, 122 S.Ct. 941, 151 L.Ed.2d 908 (2002).
Justice ALITO, concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part.
I join Justice THOMAS's opinion. DACA presents a delicate political issue, but that is not our business. As Justice THOMAS explains, DACA was unlawful from the start, and that alone is sufficient to justify its termination. But even if DACA were lawful, we would still have no basis for overturning its rescission. First, to the extent DACA represented a lawful exercise of prosecutorial discretion, its rescission represented an exercise of that same discretion, and it would therefore be unreviewable under the Administrative Procedure Act. 5 U.S.C. § 701(a)(2) ; see Heckler v. Chaney , 470 U.S. 821, 831-832, 105 S.Ct. 1649, 84 L.Ed.2d 714 (1985). Second, to the extent we could review the rescission, it was not arbitrary and capricious for essentially the reasons explained by Justice KAVANAUGH. See post , at 1933 - 1936 (opinion concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part).
Justice KAVANAUGH, concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part.
Justice KAVANAUGH further argues that the contemporaneous explanation requirement applies only to agency adjudications, not rulemakings. Post , at 1934 - 1936 (opinion concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part). But he cites no authority limiting this basic principle-which the Court regularly articulates in the context of rulemakings-to adjudications. The Government does not even raise this unheralded argument.
What matters instead is that, as the majority rightly stresses, Apodaca is a universe of one-an opinion uniquely irreconcilable with not just one, but two, strands of constitutional precedent well established both before and after the decision. The Court has long recognized that the Sixth Amendment requires unanimity. Ante, at 1399 - 1400, 1404 - 1406. Five Justices in Apodaca itself disagreed with that plurality's contrary view of the Sixth Amendment. Justice Powell's theory of dual-track incorporation also fared no better: He recognized that his argument on that score came "late in the day." Johnson v. Louisiana , 406 U.S. 356, 375, 92 S.Ct. 1620, 32 L.Ed.2d 152 (1972) (concurring opinion).
Justice KAVANAUGH, concurring in part.
The legal doctrine of stare decisis derives from the Latin maxim "stare decisis et non quieta movere ," which means to stand by the thing decided and not disturb the calm. The doctrine reflects respect for the accumulated wisdom of judges who have previously tried to solve the same problem. In 1765, Blackstone-"the preeminent authority on English law for the founding generation," Alden v. Maine , 527 U.S. 706, 715, 119 S.Ct. 2240, 144 L.Ed.2d 636 (1999) -wrote that "it is an established rule to abide by former precedents," to "keep the scale of justice even and steady, and not liable to waver with every new judge's opinion." 1 W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England 69 (1765). The Framers of our Constitution understood that the doctrine of stare decisis is part of the "judicial Power" and rooted in Article III of the Constitution. Writing in Federalist 78, Alexander Hamilton emphasized the importance of stare decisis : To "avoid an arbitrary discretion in the courts, it is indispensable" that federal judges "should be bound down by strict rules and precedents, which serve to define and point out their duty in every particular case that comes before them." The Federalist No. 78, p. 529 (J. Cooke ed. 1961). In the words of THE CHIEF JUSTICE, stare decisis ' "greatest purpose is to serve a constitutional ideal-the rule of law." Citizens United v. Federal Election Comm'n , 558 U.S. 310, 378, 130 S.Ct. 876, 175 L.Ed.2d 753 (2010) (concurring opinion).
In constitutional cases, by contrast, the Court has repeatedly said-and says again today-that the doctrine of stare decisis is not as "inflexible." Burnet , 285 U.S. at 406, 52 S.Ct. 443 (Brandeis, J., dissenting); see also ante, at 1404 - 1405; Payne , 501 U.S. at 828, 111 S.Ct. 2597 ; Scott , 437 U.S. at 101, 98 S.Ct. 2187. The reason is straightforward: As Justice O'Connor once wrote for the Court, stare decisis is not as strict "when we interpret the Constitution because our interpretation can be altered only by constitutional amendment or by overruling our prior decisions." Agostini , 521 U.S. at 235, 117 S.Ct. 1997. The Court therefore "must balance the importance of having constitutional questions decided against the importance of having them decided right. " Citizens United , 558 U.S. at 378, 130 S.Ct. 876 (ROBERTS, C. J., concurring). It follows "that in the unusual circumstance when fidelity to any particular precedent does more to damage this constitutional ideal than to advance it, we must be more willing to depart from that precedent." Ibid. In his canonical opinion in Burnet , Justice Brandeis described the Court's practice with respect to stare decisis in constitutional cases in a way that was accurate then and remains accurate now: In "cases involving the Federal Constitution, where correction through legislative action is practically impossible, this Court has often overruled its earlier decisions." 285 U.S. at 406-407, 52 S.Ct. 443 (dissenting opinion).
In particular, to overrule a constitutional precedent, the Court requires something "over and above the belief that the precedent was wrongly decided." Allen , 589 U. S., at ----, 140 S.Ct., at 1003 (internal quotation marks omitted). As Justice Scalia put it, the doctrine of stare decisis always requires "reasons that go beyond mere demonstration that the overruled opinion was wrong," for "otherwise the doctrine would be no doctrine at all." Hubbard v. United States , 514 U.S. 695, 716, 115 S.Ct. 1754, 131 L.Ed.2d 779 (1995) (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment). To overrule, the Court demands a special justification or strong grounds.
In light of the racist origins of the non-unanimous jury, it is no surprise that non-unanimous juries can make a difference in practice, especially in cases involving black defendants, victims, or jurors. After all, that was the whole point of adopting the non-unanimous jury requirement in the first place. And the math has not changed. Then and now, non-unanimous juries can silence the voices and negate the votes of black jurors, especially in cases with black defendants or black victims, and only one or two black jurors. The 10 jurors "can simply ignore the views of their fellow panel members of a different race or class." Johnson v. Louisiana , 406 U.S. 356, 397, 92 S.Ct. 1620, 32 L.Ed.2d 152 (1972) (Stewart, J., dissenting). That reality-and the resulting perception of unfairness and racial bias-can undermine confidence in and respect for the criminal justice system. The non-unanimous jury operates much the same as the unfettered peremptory challenge, a practice that for many decades likewise functioned as an engine of discrimination against black defendants, victims, and jurors. In effect, the non-unanimous jury allows backdoor and unreviewable peremptory strikes against up to 2 of the 12 jurors.
In my view, Apodaca warrants the same fate as Swain . After all, the "requirements of unanimity and impartial selection thus complement each other in ensuring the fair performance of the vital functions of a criminal court jury." Johnson , 406 U.S. at 398, 92 S.Ct. 1650 (Stewart, J., dissenting). And as Justice Thurgood Marshall forcefully explained in dissent in Apodaca , to "fence out a dissenting juror fences out a voice from the community, and undermines the principle on which our whole notion of the jury now rests." Johnson, 406 U.S. at 402, 92 S.Ct. 1651 (Marshall, J., dissenting in both Johnson and Apodaca ).
Justice THOMAS, concurring in the judgment.
The Court has repeatedly reaffirmed the Sixth Amendment's unanimity requirement. In Patton v. United States , 281 U.S. 276, 50 S.Ct. 253, 74 L.Ed. 854 (1930), the Court stated that the Sixth Amendment protects the right "that the verdict should be unanimous," id. , at 288, 50 S.Ct. 253. In Andres v. United States , 333 U.S. 740, 68 S.Ct. 880, 92 L.Ed. 1055 (1948), the Court repeated that "[u]nanimity in jury verdicts is required" by the Sixth Amendment, id. , at 748, 68 S.Ct. 880. And in Apodaca v. Oregon , 406 U.S. 404, 92 S.Ct. 1628, 32 L.Ed.2d 184 (1972), five Justices agreed that "the Sixth Amendment's guarantee of trial by jury embraces a guarantee that the verdict of the jury must be unanimous," id., at 414, 92 S.Ct. 1628 (Stewart, J., joined by Brennan and Marshall, JJ., dissenting); see also Johnson v. Louisiana , 406 U.S. 356, 371, 92 S.Ct. 1620, 32 L.Ed.2d 152 (1972) (Powell, J., concurring) (explaining views in Apodaca and its companion case); id. , at 382-383, 108 S.Ct. 1860 (Douglas, J., joined by Brennan and Marshall, JJ., dissenting) (same). We have accepted this interpretation of the Sixth Amendment in recent cases. See Southern Union Co. v. United States , 567 U.S. 343, 356, 132 S.Ct. 2344, 183 L.Ed.2d 318 (2012) ; Blakely v. Washington , 542 U.S. 296, 301, 124 S.Ct. 2531, 159 L.Ed.2d 403 (2004) ; Apprendi v. New Jersey , 530 U.S. 466, 477, 120 S.Ct. 2348, 147 L.Ed.2d 435 (2000).
In light of the express language used in some State Constitutions, respondent Louisiana argues that the omission of an express unanimity requirement in the Sixth Amendment reflects a deliberate choice. This argument fails to establish that the Court's decisions are demonstrably erroneous. The House of Representatives passed a version of the amendment providing that "[t]he trial of all crimes ... shall be by an impartial jury of freeholders of the vicinage, with the requisite of unanimity for conviction, of the right of challenge, and other accustomed requisites," 1 Annals of Cong. 435 (1789), but the final Amendment contained no reference to vicinage or unanimity. See Amdt. 6. I agree with Justice Harlan and the Court that "the meaning of this change is wholly speculative" and that there is "no concrete evidence" that the Senate rejected the requirement of unanimity. Baldwin v. New York , 399 U.S. 66, 123, n. 9, 90 S.Ct. 1886, 26 L.Ed.2d 437 (1970) (Harlan, J., dissenting); see also ante , at 11-12; Letter from J. Madison to E. Pendleton (Sept. 14, 1789), in 1 Letters and Other Writings of James Madison 491 (1867). There is thus sufficient evidence to support this Court's prior interpretation that the Sixth Amendment right to a trial by jury requires unanimity.
I "decline to apply the legal fiction" of due process incorporation. Timbs v. Indiana , 586 U. S. ----, ----, 139 S.Ct. 682, 692, 203 L.Ed.2d 11 (2019) (THOMAS, J., concurring in judgment) (internal quotation marks omitted). As a result, I part ways with the Court on both its affirmative argument about the Fourteenth Amendment and its treatment of Apodaca , in which five Justices agreed the Sixth Amendment included a right to unanimity but a different majority concluded that the right did not apply to the States. See ante , at 1397 - 1400.
Justice ALITO, with whom THE CHIEF JUSTICE joins, and with whom Justice KAGAN joins as to all but Part III-D, dissenting.
Fourth, it is hard to know what to make of the functionalist charge. One Member of the majority explicitly disavows this criticism, see ante , at 1409 (SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in part), and it is most unlikely that all the Justices in the majority are ready to label all functionalist decisions as poorly reasoned. Most of the landmark criminal procedure decisions from roughly Apodaca 's time fall into that category. See Mapp v. Ohio , 367 U.S. 643, 654, 81 S.Ct. 1684, 6 L.Ed.2d 1081 (1961) (Fourth Amendment); Miranda v. Arizona , 384 U.S. 436, 444, 86 S.Ct. 1602, 16 L.Ed.2d 694 (1966) (Fifth Amendment); Gideon v. Wainwright , 372 U.S. 335, 344-345, 83 S.Ct. 792, 9 L.Ed.2d 799 (1963) (Sixth Amendment); Furman v. Georgia , 408 U.S. 238, 239, 92 S.Ct. 2726, 33 L.Ed.2d 346 (1972) (per curiam ) (Eighth Amendment). Are they all now up for grabs?
The majority's only other reason for overruling Apodaca is that it is inconsistent with related decisions and recent legal developments. Ante , at 1405 - 1406; ante , at 1409 (SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in part). I agree that Justice Powell's view on incorporation is not in harmony with the bulk of our case law, but the majority's point about "recent legal developments" is an exaggeration. No subsequent Sixth Amendment decision has undercut the plurality. And while Justice Powell's view on incorporation has been further isolated by later cases holding that two additional provisions of the Bill of Rights apply with full force to the States, see Timbs , 586 U. S., at ----, 139 S.Ct., at 687 (Eighth Amendment's Excessive Fines Clause); McDonald , supra, at 791, 130 S.Ct. 3020 (plurality opinion) (Second Amendment), the project of complete incorporation was nearly done when Apodaca was handed down. See McDonald , supra , at 765, n. 13, 130 S.Ct. 3020.
Two other Justices in the majority acknowledge that Apodaca was a precedent and thus would presumably regard today's decision as a "new rule," but the question remains whether today's decision qualifies as a "watershed rule." Justice KAVANAUGH concludes that it does not and all but decides-without briefing or argument-that the decision will not apply retroactively on federal collateral review and similarly that there will be no successful claims of ineffective assistance of counsel for failing to challenge Apodaca . See ante, at 1418 - 1420 (opinion concurring in part).
Notwithstanding the splintered 4-1-4 decision in Apodaca , its bottomline result carried precedential force. In the American system of stare decisis , the result and the reasoning each independently have precedential force, and courts are therefore bound to follow both the result and the reasoning of a prior decision. See Seminole Tribe of Fla. v. Florida , 517 U.S. 44, 67, 116 S.Ct. 1114, 134 L.Ed.2d 252 (1996) ; Randall v. Sorrell , 548 U.S. 230, 243, 126 S.Ct. 2479, 165 L.Ed.2d 482 (2006) (opinion of BREYER, J.); County of Allegheny v. American Civil Liberties Union, Greater Pittsburgh Chapter , 492 U.S. 573, 668, 109 S.Ct. 3086, 106 L.Ed.2d 472 (1989) (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment in part and dissenting in part). The result of Apodaca was that state criminal juries need not be unanimous. That precedential result has been followed by this Court and the other federal and state courts for the last 48 years. To be sure, Apodaca had no majority opinion. When the Court's decision is splintered, courts follow the result, and they also follow the reasoning or standards set forth in the opinion constituting the "narrowest grounds" of the Justices in the majority. See Marks v. United States , 430 U.S. 188, 193, 97 S.Ct. 990, 51 L.Ed.2d 260 (1977). That Marks rule is ordinarily commonsensical to apply and usually means that courts in essence heed the opinion that occupies the middle-ground position between (i) the broadest opinion among the Justices in the majority and (ii) the dissenting opinion. See United States v. Duvall , 740 F.3d 604, 610-611 (CADC 2013) (Kavanaugh, J., concurring in denial of rehearing en banc). On very rare occasions, as in Apodaca , it can be difficult to discern which opinion's reasoning has precedential effect under Marks. See also Nichols v. United States , 511 U.S. 738, 745-746, 114 S.Ct. 1921, 128 L.Ed.2d 745 (1994) (analyzing Baldasar v. Illinois , 446 U.S. 222, 100 S.Ct. 1585, 64 L.Ed.2d 169 (1980) (per curiam )). But even when that happens, the result of the decision still constitutes a binding precedent for the federal and state courts, and for this Court, unless and until it is overruled by this Court. As I read the Court's various opinions today, six Justices treat the result in Apodaca as a precedent for purposes of stare decisis analysis. A different group of six Justices concludes that Apodaca should be and is overruled.
Justice KAVANAUGH's defense, see ante , at 1417 - 1419 (opinion concurring in part), is essentially the same. After reiterating the history recounted by the majority, he eventually acknowledges that there are "neutral and legitimate" reasons for allowing non-unanimous verdicts and that Louisiana may have retained a version of its old rule for such reasons. He also agrees with the majority that a rule allowing nonunanimous verdicts would be unconstitutional no matter what the State's reasons. So what is the relevance of the original motivations for the Louisiana and Oregon rules? He offers no explanation. He does opine that allowing such verdicts works to the disadvantage of African-American defendants, but the effect of various jury decision rules is a complex question that has been the subject of much social-science research, none of which the opinion even acknowledges.
It is also important that the Court as a whole adhere to its "precedent[s] about precedent." Alleyne v. United States , 570 U.S. 99, 134, 133 S.Ct. 2151, 186 L.Ed.2d 314 (2013) (ALITO, J., dissenting). If individual Justices apply different standards for overruling past decisions, the overall effects of the doctrine will not be neutral.
Three Justices join the principal opinion in its entirety. Two Justices do not join Part IV-A, but each of these Justices takes a position not embraced by portions of the principal opinion that they join. See ante , at 1409 (SOTOMAYOR, J., concurring in part) (disavowing principal opinion's criticism of Justice White's Apodaca opinion as "functionalist"); ante, at 1418 - 1420 (KAVANAUGH, J., concurring in part) (opining that the decision in this case does not apply on collateral review). And Justice THOMAS would decide the case on entirely different grounds and thus concurs only in the judgment. See ante, at 1420 - 1421.
Five Justices in Furman found that the Eighth Amendment imposes an evolving standard of decency, 408 U.S. at 255-257, 92 S.Ct. 2726 (Douglas, J., concurring); id ., at 265-269, 92 S.Ct. 2726 (Brennan, J., concurring); id ., at 309-310, 92 S.Ct. 2726 (Stewart, J., concurring); id ., at 312-314, 92 S.Ct. 2726 (White, J., concurring); id. , at 316, 322-333, 92 S.Ct. 2726 (Marshall, J., concurring), and our subsequent cases have done the same.
As recently as 2010, prominent advocates urged us to hold that a provision of the Bill of Rights applies differently to the Federal Government and the States. In McDonald , 561 U.S. 742, 130 S.Ct. 3020, 177 L.Ed.2d 894, the city of Chicago and some of its amici argued that, despite our decision in District of Columbia v. Heller , 554 U.S. 570, 128 S.Ct. 2783, 171 L.Ed.2d 637 (2008), States and cities should be given leeway to regulate the possession of a firearm in the home for self-defense in accordance with the particular needs and desires of their citizens. 561 U.S. at 753, 130 S.Ct. 3020. Although this argument did not prevail, four Justices, some now in the majority, appeared to take that view. See id. , at 927, 130 S.Ct. 3020 (BREYER, J., joined by GINSBURG and SOTOMAYOR, JJ., dissenting) (observing that "gun violence ... varies as between rural communities and cities" and arguing that States and cities should be free to adopt rules that meet local needs and preferences); id. , at 866, 130 S.Ct. 3020 (Stevens, J., dissenting) ("The rights protected against state infringement by the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause need not be identical in shape or scope to the rights protected against Federal Government infringement by the various provisions of the Bill of Rights").
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.
In the early 20th century, several States attempted to break with that tradition. The high courts of those States quickly struck down their restrictive laws. As one justice of the Mississippi Supreme Court wrote in 1931: The "common law proceeds upon an idea that before there can be a crime there must be an intelligence capable of comprehending the act prohibited, and the probable consequence of the act, and that the act is wrong." Sinclair v. State , 161 Miss. 142, 158, 132 So. 581, 583 (Ethridge, J., concurring). Accordingly, Justice Ethridge said, insanity "has always been a complete defense to all crimes from the earliest ages of the common law." Ibid. ; State v. Strasburg , 60 Wash. 106, 116, 110 P. 1020, 1022-1023 (1910) ; cf. State v. Lange , 168 La. 958, 965, 123 So. 639, 642 (1929).
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, dissenting.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice BREYER, and Justice KAGAN join, dissenting.
Thirteen years later, in Davis v. Bandemer , we addressed a claim that Indiana Republicans had cracked and packed Democrats in violation of the Equal Protection Clause. 478 U.S. 109, 116-117, 106 S.Ct. 2797, 92 L.Ed.2d 85 (1986) (plurality opinion). A majority of the Court agreed that the case was justiciable, but the Court splintered over the proper standard to apply. Four Justices would have required proof of "intentional discrimination against an identifiable political group and an actual discriminatory effect on that group." Id. , at 127, 106 S.Ct. 2797. Two Justices would have focused on "whether the boundaries of the voting districts have been distorted deliberately and arbitrarily to achieve illegitimate ends." Id. , at 165, 106 S.Ct. 2797 (Powell, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). Three Justices, meanwhile, would have held that the Equal Protection Clause simply "does not supply judicially manageable standards for resolving purely political gerrymandering claims." Id. , at 147, 106 S.Ct. 2797 (O'Connor, J., concurring in judgment). At the end of the day, there was "no 'Court' for a standard that properly should be applied in determining whether a challenged redistricting plan is an unconstitutional partisan political gerrymander." Id. , at 185, n. 25, 106 S.Ct. 2797 (opinion of Powell, J.). In any event, the Court held that the plaintiffs had failed to show that the plan violated the Constitution.
Eighteen years later, in Vieth , the plaintiffs complained that Pennsylvania's legislature "ignored all traditional redistricting criteria, including the preservation of local government boundaries," in order to benefit Republican congressional candidates. 541 U.S. at 272-273, 124 S.Ct. 1769 (plurality opinion) (brackets omitted). Justice Scalia wrote for a four-Justice plurality. He would have held that the plaintiffs' claims were nonjusticiable because there was no "judicially discernible and manageable standard" for deciding them. Id. , at 306, 124 S.Ct. 1769. Justice Kennedy, concurring in the judgment, noted "the lack of comprehensive and neutral principles for drawing electoral boundaries [and] the absence of rules to limit and confine judicial intervention." Id. , at 306-307, 124 S.Ct. 1769. He nonetheless left open the possibility that "in another case a standard might emerge." Id. , at 312, 124 S.Ct. 1769. Four Justices dissented.
In considering whether partisan gerrymandering claims are justiciable, we are mindful of Justice Kennedy's counsel in Vieth : Any standard for resolving such claims must be grounded in a "limited and precise rationale" and be "clear, manageable, and politically neutral." 541 U.S. at 306-308, 124 S.Ct. 1769 (opinion concurring in judgment). An important reason for those careful constraints is that, as a Justice with extensive experience in state and local politics put it, "[t]he opportunity to control the drawing of electoral boundaries through the legislative process of apportionment is a critical and traditional part of politics in the United States." Bandemer , 478 U.S. at 145, 106 S.Ct. 2797 (opinion of O'Connor, J.). See Gaffney , 412 U.S. at 749, 93 S.Ct. 2321 (observing that districting implicates "fundamental 'choices about the nature of representation' " (quoting Burns v. Richardson , 384 U.S. 73, 92, 86 S.Ct. 1286, 16 L.Ed.2d 376 (1966) )). An expansive standard requiring "the correction of all election district lines drawn for partisan reasons would commit federal and state courts to unprecedented intervention in the American political process," Vieth , 541 U.S. at 306, 124 S.Ct. 1769 (opinion of Kennedy, J.).
Or perhaps fairness should be measured by adherence to "traditional" districting criteria, such as maintaining political subdivisions, keeping communities of interest together, and protecting incumbents. See Brief for Bipartisan Group of Current and Former Members of the House of Representatives as Amici Curiae ; Brief for Professor Wesley Pegden et al. as Amici Curiae in No. 18-422. But protecting incumbents, for example, enshrines a particular partisan distribution. And the "natural political geography" of a State-such as the fact that urban electoral districts are often dominated by one political party-can itself lead to inherently packed districts. As Justice Kennedy has explained, traditional criteria such as compactness and contiguity "cannot promise political neutrality when used as the basis for relief. Instead, it seems, a decision under these standards would unavoidably have significant political effect, whether intended or not." Vieth , 541 U.S. at 308-309, 124 S.Ct. 1769 (opinion concurring in judgment). See id. , at 298, 124 S.Ct. 1769 (plurality opinion) ("[P]acking and cracking, whether intentional or no, are quite consistent with adherence to compactness and respect for political subdivision lines").
Justice KAGAN, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice BREYER, and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.
Partisan gerrymandering of the kind before us not only subverts democracy (as if that weren't bad enough). It violates individuals' constitutional rights as well. That statement is not the lonesome cry of a dissenting Justice. This Court has recognized extreme partisan gerrymandering as such a violation for many years.
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins, concurring.
JUSTICE THOMAS, with whom JUSTICE ALITO joins as to all but Part II-A-1, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins, concurring in the judgment.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins, concurring.
Justice GORSUCH, with whom Justice SOTOMAYOR joins as to Parts I, II, III, and IV, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Justice ALITO, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice ALITO and Justice KAVANAUGH join, and with whom Justice THOMAS joins except as to footnote 9, dissenting.
For example, Oklahoma appears to apply a general rule that "issues that were not raised previously on direct appeal, but which could have been raised, are waived for further review." Logan v. State , 2013 OKCR 2, ¶ 1, 293 P.3d 969, 973. Indeed, Justice THOMAS contends that this state-law limitation on collateral review prevents us from considering even the case now before us. Post, at 2503 (dissenting opinion). But while that state-law rule may often bar our way, it doesn't in this case. After noting a potential state-law obstacle, the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals (OCCA) proceeded to address the merits of Mr. McGirt's federal MCA claim anyway. Because the OCCA's opinion "fairly appears to rest primarily on federal law or to be interwoven with federal law" and lacks any "plain statement" that it was relying on a state-law ground, we have jurisdiction to consider the federal-law question presented to us. See Michigan v. Long , 463 U.S. 1032, 1040-1041, 1044, 103 S.Ct. 3469, 77 L.Ed.2d 1201 (1983).
I agree with THE CHIEF JUSTICE that the Court misapplies our precedents in granting petitioner relief. Ante , at 2484 - 2502 (dissenting opinion). But in doing so, the Court also overrides Oklahoma's statutory procedural bar, upsetting a violent sex offender's conviction without the power to do so. The State of Oklahoma deserves more respect under our Constitution's federal system. Therefore, I respectfully dissent.
Justice GORSUCH, with whom Justice THOMAS joins, dissenting.
As judges, we may be sorely tempted to "rationalize" the law and impose our own free-trade rules for all goods and services in interstate commerce. Certainly, that temptation seems to have proven nearly irresistible for this Court when it comes to alcohol. And as Justice Cardozo once observed, "an intellectual passion ... for symmetry of form and substance" is "an ideal which can never fail to exert some measure of attraction upon the professional experts who make up the lawyer class." B. Cardozo, The Nature of the Judicial Process 34 (1921). But real life is not always so tidy and satisfactory, and neither are the democratic compromises we are bound to respect as judges. Like it or not, those who adopted the Twenty-first Amendment took the view that reasonable people can disagree about the costs and benefits of free trade in alcohol. They left us with clear instructions that the free-trade rules this Court has devised for "cabbages and candlesticks" should not be applied to alcohol. Carter v. Virginia , 321 U.S. 131, 139, 64 S.Ct. 464, 88 L.Ed. 605 (1944) (Frankfurter, J., concurring). Under the terms of the compromise they hammered out, the regulation of alcohol wasn't left to the imagination of a committee of nine sitting in Washington, D. C., but to the judgment of the people themselves and their local elected representatives. State governments were supposed to serve as "laborator[ies]" of democracy, New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann , 285 U.S. 262, 311, 52 S.Ct. 371, 76 L.Ed. 747 (1932) (Brandeis, J., dissenting), with "broad power to regulate liquor under § 2," Granholm , 544 U.S. at 493, 125 S.Ct. 1885. If the people wish to alter this arrangement, that is their sovereign right. But until then, I would enforce the Twenty-first Amendment as they wrote and originally understood it.
Justice Scalia, for his part, thought the "statute's invalidity [was] fully established by its facial discrimination against interstate commerce"-discrimination that in his view "eliminate[d] the immunity afforded by the Twenty-first Amendment." Healy , supra , at 344, 109 S.Ct. 2491 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (citing Bacchus , supra , at 275-276, 104 S.Ct. 3049 ).
Justice BREYER, for example, interprets this provision to mean that "the Secretary must, if feasible, obtain demographic information through a survey sent to a sample of households, rather than through the short-form census questionnaire to which every household must respond." Ante , at 2585 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). Under that reading of § 195, it is asserted, the provision sets forth a judicially reviewable limit on the Secretary's authority to obtain information through direct inquiries.
Justice ALITO has made a strong argument that the specific decision at issue here-whether to include a citizenship question on the census-is a matter "committed to agency discretion by law." 5 U. S. C. § 701(a)(2) ; see post , at 2596 - 2597 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). As he explains, the Secretary's decision plainly falls within the scope of the Secretary's constitutional authority, does not implicate any statutory prohibition, and is among the "inquiries" and "content[s]" of the census that the Secretary is expressly directed to "determine" for himself. §§ 5, 141(a) ; see post , at 2598 - 2603. Nevertheless, I assume, for the purpose of this opinion, that the Secretary's decision is subject to judicial review.
Because the § 701(a)(2) analysis dictates whether APA review may be had, Justice BREYER's assertion that the APA "supplies [a] limit" on the Secretary's otherwise "broad" delegation, ante , at 2595 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part), mistakenly assumes the answer to the reviewability question. Cf. Heckler v. Chaney , 470 U.S. 821, 828, 105 S.Ct. 1649, 84 L.Ed.2d 714 (1985) ("[B]efore any review at all may be had, a party must first clear the hurdle of § 701(a)").
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice GORSUCH and Justice KAVANAUGH join, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG, Justice SOTOMAYOR, and Justice KAGAN join, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins, concurring in the judgment.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice KAGAN joins, dissenting.
Indeed, the Court acknowledges that some thought it an open question during the finality era whether the Suspension Clause imposes limits on Congress' ability to limit judicial review. See ante , at 1980, n. 25 (quoting Justice Brewer's concurring opinion in United States ex rel. Turner v. Williams , 194 U.S. 279, 295, 24 S.Ct. 719, 48 L.Ed. 979 (1904), raising the question). That this question remained unsettled, see n. 1, supra , suffices to support the Court's conclusion in Heikkila : The finality-era Courts endeavored to construe jurisdiction-stripping statutes to avoid serious constitutional questions about the extent of congressional power to limit judicial review.
The Court wisely declines to explore whether the Suspension Clause independently guarantees the availability of the writ or simply restricts the temporary withholding of its operation, a point of disagreement between the majority and dissent in INS v. St. Cyr , 533 U.S. 289, 121 S.Ct. 2271, 150 L.Ed.2d 347 (2001). Ante , at 1968 - 1969, n. 12. Justice Scalia, dissenting in St. Cyr , wrote that the Suspension Clause "does not guarantee any content to (or even the existence of) the writ of habeas corpus, but merely provides that the writ shall not (except in case of rebellion or invasion) be suspended." 533 U.S. at 337, 121 S.Ct. 2271. But no majority of this Court, at any time, has adopted that theory. Notably, moreover, even Justice Scalia appears to have abandoned his position just three years later in Hamdi v. Rumsfeld , 542 U.S. 507, 555-556, 124 S.Ct. 2633, 159 L.Ed.2d 578 (2004) (dissenting opinion) ("The two ideas central to Blackstone's understanding-due process as the right secured, and habeas corpus as the instrument by which due process could be insisted upon by a citizen illegally imprisoned-found expression in the Constitution's Due Process and Suspension Clauses"); see also id. , at 558, 124 S.Ct. 2633 ("The writ of habeas corpus was preserved in the Constitution-the only common-law writ to be explicitly mentioned"). Even one concurring opinion seems to recognize that the Suspension Clause "protect[s] a substantive right." Ante , at 1985 (opinion of THOMAS, J.).
Holding that an Act of Congress unconstitutionally suspends the writ of habeas corpus is momentous. See Boumediene , 553 U.S. at 773, 128 S.Ct. 2229 (noting "the care Congress has taken throughout our Nation's history" to avoid suspension). The Justices on the Court at the beginning of the finality era had seen historic occasions when the writ was suspended-during the Civil War by President Lincoln and then by Congress, and later during Reconstruction by President Grant. See Hamdi v. Rumsfeld , 542 U.S. 507, 563, 124 S.Ct. 2633, 159 L.Ed.2d 578 (2004) (Scalia, J., dissenting) (discussing these events). The suspension of habeas during this era played a prominent role in our constitutional history. See Ex parte Merryman , 17 F.Cas. 144, 151-152 (No. 9,487) (CCD Md. 1861) (Taney, C. J.); Ex parte Milligan , 4 Wall. 2, 116, 131, 18 L.Ed. 281 (1866). (Two of the Justices at the beginning of the finality era were on the Court when Ex parte Milligan was decided.) The Justices knew a suspension of the writ when they saw one, and it is impossible to believe that the Nishimura Ekiu Court identified another occasion when Congress had suspended the writ and based its decision on the Suspension Clause without even mentioning that provision.
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice GINSBURG and Justice SOTOMAYOR join, dissenting.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins, concurring.
Justice SOTOMAYOR, with whom Justice GINSBURG joins, dissenting.
Justice ALITO, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins, concurring.
Justice KAGAN, with whom Justice BREYER joins, concurring in the judgment.
Justice GINSBURG, with whom Justice SOTOMAYOR joins, dissenting.
Remarkably, Justice ALITO maintains that stripping women of insurance coverage for contraceptive services imposes no burden. See ante , at 2395 - 2396 (concurring opinion). He reaches this conclusion because, in his view, federal law does not require the contraceptive coverage denied to women under the exemption. Ibid . Congress, however, called upon HRSA to specify contraceptive and other preventive services for women in order to ensure equality in women employees' access to healthcare, thus safeguarding their health and well-being. See supra, at 2400 - 2402.
Justice THOMAS, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins as to Part II, concurring in the judgment.
This structural principle is explicitly enshrined in the Tenth Amendment. That Amendment states that "[t]he powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people." As Justice Story explained, "[t]his amendment is a mere affirmation of what, upon any just reasoning, is a necessary rule of interpreting the constitution. Being an instrument of limited and enumerated powers, it follows irresistibly, that what is not conferred, is withheld, and belongs to the state authorities." 3 J. Story, Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States § 1900, p. 752 (1833); see also Alden v. Maine , 527 U.S. 706, 714, 119 S.Ct. 2240, 144 L.Ed.2d 636 (1999) ; New York v. United States , 505 U.S. 144, 156, 112 S.Ct. 2408, 120 L.Ed.2d 120 (1992). In other words, the Tenth Amendment "states but a truism that all is retained which has not been surrendered," United States v. Darby , 312 U.S. 100, 124, 61 S.Ct. 451, 85 L.Ed. 609 (1941), "mak[ing] clear that powers reside at the state level except where the Constitution removes them from that level," U. S. Term Limits , supra , at 848, 115 S.Ct. 1842 (THOMAS, J., dissenting); see also Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority , 469 U.S. 528, 549, 105 S.Ct. 1005, 83 L.Ed.2d 1016 (1985).
Given these safeguards and the Court's precedents, we cannot conclude that absolute immunity is necessary or appropriate under Article II or the Supremacy Clause. Our dissenting colleagues agree. Justice THOMAS reaches the same conclusion based on the original understanding of the Constitution reflected in Marshall's decision in Burr . Post, at 2434, 2435 - 2436. And Justice ALITO, also persuaded by Burr , "agree[s]" that "not all" state criminal subpoenas for a President's records "should be barred." Post, at 2448. On that point the Court is unanimous.
Justice KAVANAUGH, with whom Justice GORSUCH joins, concurring in the judgment.
But we are not without means of obtaining an authoritative construction. Last year the Texas voters amended the Texas Constitution to provide that the “court of criminal appeals [has] jurisdiction to answer questions of state law certified from a federal appellate court.” Tex. Const., Art. 5, § 3-c. See Tex. Rule App. Proc. 214 (implementing this aspect of the constitutional provision). As Justice O’Connor explained recently, “Speculation by a federal court about the meaning of a state statute in the absence of prior state court adjudication is particularly gratuitous when . . . the state courts stand willing to address questions of state law on certification from a federal court.” Brockett v. Spokane Arcades, Inc., 472 U. S. 491, 510 (1985) (concurring). The Court repeatedly has emphasized the appropriateness of certification in cases presenting uncertain questions of state law. In such cases, certification can “‘save time, energy, and resources and hel[p] build a cooperative judicial federalism.’” Bellotti v. Baird, 428 U. S. 132, 150-151 (1976) (quoting Lehman Brothers v. Schein, 416 U. S. 386, 391 (1974)).
Second, contrary to the city’s contention, the First Amendment protects a significant amount of verbal criticism and challenge directed at police officers. “Speech is often provocative and challenging. . . . [But it] is nevertheless protected against censorship or punishment, unless shown likely to produce a clear and present danger of a serious substantive evil that rises far above public inconvenience, annoyance, or unrest.” Terminiello v. Chicago, 337 U. S. 1, 4 (1949). In Lewis v. City of New Orleans, 415 U. S. 130 (1974), for example, the appellant was found to have yelled obscenities and threats at an officer who had asked appellant’s husband to produce his driver’s license. Appellant was convicted under a municipal ordinance that made it a crime “ Tor any person wantonly to curse or revile or to use obscene or opprobrious language toward or with reference to any member of the city police while in the actual performance of his duty.’” Id., at 132 (citation omitted). We vacated the conviction and invalidated the ordinance as facially overbroad. Critical to our decision was the fact that the ordinance “punishe[d] only spoken words” and was not limited in scope to fighting words that “‘by their very utterance inflict injury or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace.’” Id., at 133, quoting Gooding v. Wilson, 405 U. S. 518, 525 (1972); see also ibid. (Georgia breach-of-peace statute not limited to fighting words held facially invalid). Moreover, in a concurring opinion in Lewis, Justice Powell suggested that even the “fighting words” exception recognized in Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 U. S. 568 (1942), might require a narrower application in cases involving words addressed to a police officer, because “a properly trained officer may reasonably be expected to ‘exercise a higher degree of restraint’ than the average citizen, and thus be less likely to respond belligerently to ‘fighting words.’” 415 U. S., at 135 (citation omitted).
At this point, however, the testimony substantially diverges. Kelley states that Hill then “interrupted]” him with the verbal challenge quoted in text, and that a crowd was beginning to form. Id., at 57-58, 61, 68-69. Hill testified that both officers grabbed Charles, placed him up against a wall, and threatened to hit him with a large flashlight. Id., at 14. Only then, according to Hill, did he call out: “[T]he kid has done nothing wrong. If you want to pick on somebody, pick on me.” Id., at 16. We note the applicability of Justice Powell’s observation that there is a “possibility of abuse” where convictions under an ordinance frequently turn on the resolution of a “direct conflict of testimony as to ‘who said what.’ ” Lewis v. City of New Orleans, 415 U. S. 130, 135, n. (1974) (Powell, J., concurring in result). See infra, at 466.
Justice Powell suggests that our analysis of protected speech sweeps too broadly. But if some constitutionally unprotected speech must go unpunished, that is a price worth paying to preserve the vitality of the First Amendment. “ ‘[I]f absolute assurance of tranquility is required, we may as well forget about free speech. Under such a requirement, the only “free” speech would consist of platitudes. That kind of speech does not need constitutional protection.’” Spence v. Washington, 418 U. S. 405, 416 (1974) (Douglas, J., concurring) (citation omitted).
We are troubled by the implication that defendants whose victims were assets to their community are more deserving of punishment than those whose victims are perceived to be less worthy. Of course, our system of justice does not tolerate such distinctions. Cf. Furman v. Georgia, 408 U. S. 238, 242 (1972) (Douglas, J., concurring).
with whom The Chief Justice, Justice White, and Justice O’Connor join, dissenting.
Finally, it has sometimes been said that a precedent becomes more vulnerable as it becomes outdated and after being “‘tested by experience, has been found to be inconsistent with the sense of justice or with the social welfare.’” Runyon, 427 U. S., at 191 (Stevens, J., concurring), quoting B. Cardozo, The Nature of the Judicial Process 149 (1921). Whatever the effect of this consideration may be in statutory cases, it offers no support for overruling Runyon. In recent decades, state and federal legislation has been enacted to prohibit private racial discrimination in many aspects of our society. Whether Runyon’s interpretation of § 1981 as prohibiting racial discrimination in the making and enforcement of private contracts is right or wrong as an original matter, it is certain that it is not inconsistent with the prevailing sense of justice in this country. To the contrary, Runyon is entirely consistent with our society’s deep commitment to the eradication of discrimination based on a person’s race or the color of his or her skin. See Bob Jones University v. United States, 461 U. S. 574, 593 (1983) (“[Ejvery pronouncement of this Court and myriad Acts of Congress and Executive Orders attest a firm national policy to prohibit racial segregation and discrimination”); see also Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U. S. 483 (1954); Plessy v. Ferguson, 163 U. S. 537, 559 (1896) (Harlan, J., dissenting) (“The law regards man as man, and takes no account of his . . . color when his civil rights as guaranteed by the supreme law of the land are involved”).
The second of these guarantees, “the same right. . . to . . . enforce contracts ... as is enjoyed by white citizens,” embraces protection of a legal process, and of a right of access to legal process, that will address and resolve contract-law claims without regard to race. In this respect, it prohibits discrimination that infects the legal process in ways that prevent one from enforcing contract rights, by reason of his or her race, and this is so whether this discrimination is attributed to a statute or simply to existing practices. It also covers wholly private efforts to impede access to the courts or obstruct nonjudicial methods of adjudicating disputes about the force of binding obligations, as well as discrimination by private entities, such as labor unions, in enforcing the terms of a contract. Following this principle and consistent with our holding in Runyon that § 1981 applies to private conduct, we have held that certain private entities such as labor unions, which bear explicit responsibilities to process grievances, press claims, and represent member in disputes over the terms of binding obligations that run from the employer to the employee, are subject to liability under § 1981 for racial discrimination in the enforcement of labor contracts. See Goodman v. Lukens Steel Co., 482 U. S. 656 (1987). The right to enforce contracts does not, however, extend beyond conduct by an employer which impairs an employee’s ability to enforce through legal process his or her established contract rights. As Justice White put it with much force in Runyon, one cannot seriously “contend that the grant of the other rights enumerated in § 1981, [that is, other than the right to “make” contracts,] i. e., the rights ‘to sue, be parties, give evidence,’ and ‘enforce contracts’ accomplishes anything other than the removal of legal disabilities to sue, be a party, testify or enforce a contract. Indeed, it is impossible to give such language any other meaning.” 427 U. S., at 195, n. 5 (dissenting opinion) (emphasis in original).
Justice BRENNAN objects also to the fact that our stare decisis analysis places no reliance on the fact that Congress itself has not overturned the interpretation of § 1981 contained in Runyon, and in effect has ratified our decision in that case. See post, at 200-205. This is no oversight on our part. As we reaffirm today, considerations of stare decisis have added force in statutory eases because Congress may alter what we have done by amending the statute. In constitutional cases, by contrast, Congress lacks this option, and an incorrect or outdated precedent may be overturned only by our own reconsideration or by constitutional amendment. See sitpra, at 172-173. It does not follow, however, that Congress’ failure to overturn a statutory precedent is reason for this Court to adhere to it. It is “impossible to assert with any degree of assurance that congressional failure to act represents” affirmative congressional approval of the Court’s statutory interpretation. Johnson v. Transportation Agency, Santa Clara County, 480 U. S. 616, 671-672 (1987) (Scalia, J., dissenting). Congress may legislate, moreover, only through the passage of a bill which is approved by both Houses and signed by the President. See U. S. Const., Art. I, §7, cl. 2. Congressional inaction cannot amend a duly enacted statute. We think also that the materials relied upon by Justice BREN-nan as “more positive signs of Congress’ views,” which are the failure of an amendment to a different statute offered before our decision in Runyon, see post, at 201-204, and the passage of an attorney’s fee statute having nothing to do with our holding in Runyon, see post, at 204-205, demonstrate well the danger of placing undue reliance on the concept of congressional “ratification.”
Although the Court in Runyon treated it as settled by Jones, Tillman, and Johnson that § 1981 prohibited private racial discrimination in contracting, it nevertheless discussed in detail the claim that § 1981 is narrower in scope than § 1982. The primary focus of disagreement between the majority in Runyon and Justice White’s dissent, a debate renewed by the parties here on reargument, concerns the origins of § 1981. Section 1 of the 1866 Act was expressly reenacted by § 18 of the Voting Rights Act of 1870. Act of May 31, 1870, ch. 114, § 18, 16 Stat. 144. Section 16 of the 1870 Act nevertheless also provided that “all persons within the jurisdiction of the United States shall have the same right in every State and Territory in the United States to make and enforce contracts . . . .” Ibid. Section 1 of the 1866 Act, as reenacted by § 18 of the 1870 Act, was passed under Congress’ Thirteenth Amendment power to identify and legislate against the badges and incidents of slavery, and, we held in Jones, applied to private acts of discrimination. The dissent in Runyon, however, argued that § 16 of the 1870 Act was enacted solely under Congress’ Fourteenth Amendment power to prohibit States from denying any person the equal protection of the laws, and could have had no application to purely private discrimination. See Runyon, supra, at 196-201 (White, J., dissenting). But see District of Columbia v. Carter, 409 U. S. 418, 424, n. 8 (1973) (suggesting Congress has the power to proscribe purely private conduct under § 5 of the Fourteenth Amendment). When all existing federal statutes were codified in the Revised Statutes of 1874, the Statutes included but a single provision prohibiting racial discrimination in the making and enforcement of contracts — § 1977, which was identical to the current §1981. The Runyon dissenters believed that this provision derived solely from § 16 of the 1870 Act, that the analysis of § 1 in Jones was of no application to § 1981, and that § 1981 hence could not be interpreted to prohibit private discrimination.
The majority’s only basis for this proposition is the plurality opinion in Watson v. Fort Worth Bank & Trust, 487 U. S. 977, 997 (1988), which in turn cites no authority. As Justice Blackmun explained in Watson, id., at 1001-1002 (concurring in part and concurring in judgment), and as I have shown here, the assertion profoundly misapprehends the difference between disparate-impact and disparate-treatment claims.
“With the historical evidence thus in equipoise,” ante, at 2814 (WHITE, J., dissenting), but with Schoenthal weighing on the “legal” side of the scale, I then would turn to the second stage of the Atlas Roofing inquiry: I would ask whether, assuming the claim here is of a “legal” nature, Congress has assigned it to be adjudicated in a special tribunal “with which the jury would be incompatible.” Atlas Roofing, 430 U.S., at 450, 97 S.Ct., at 1266; see also Tull v. United States, 481 U.S. 412, 418, n. 4, 107 S.Ct. 1831, 1835 n. 4, 95 L.Ed.2d 365 (1987). Here, I agree with Justice WHITE that Katchen v. Landy, 382 U.S. 323, 86 5.Ct. 467, 15 L.Ed.2d 391 (1966), as interpreted in Atlas Roofing, requires the conclusion that courts exercising core bankruptcy functions are equitable tribunals, in which “a jury would be out of place and would go far to dismantle the statutory scheme.” Atlas Roofing, 430 U.S., at 454, n. 11, 97 S.Ct., at 1268, n. 11.
Justice SCALIA, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
It may be correct, as Justice Scalia notes in his opinion concurring in the judgment, that interpreting “prejudicial effect to the defendant” to include only “prejudicial effect to [a] criminal defendant,” and not prejudicial effect to other categories of litigants as well, does the “least violence to the text,” -ante, at 529, if what we mean by “violence” is the interpolation of excess words or the deletion of existing words. But the reading endorsed by Justice Scalia and the majority does violence to the logic of the only rationale Members of Congress offered for the Rule they adopted.
with whom Justice Scalia and Justice Kennedy join, concurring.
with whom Justice Marshall joins, dissenting.
with whom Justice Brennan, Justice Marshall, and Justice Blackmun join as to Parts I and II, concurring in the judgment.
Moreover, we have not “rejected” or “declined to apply” the compelling interest test in our recent cases. Ante, at 883-884. Recent cases have instead affirmed that test as a fundamental part of our First Amendment doctrine. See, e. g., Hernandez, 490 U. S., at 699; Hobbie, supra, at 141— 142 (rejecting Chief Justice Burger’s suggestion in Roy, supra, at 707-708, that free exercise claims be assessed under a less rigorous “reasonable means” standard). The cases cited by the Court signal no retreat from our consistent adherence to the compelling interest test. In both Bowen v. Roy, supra, and Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective Assn., 485 U. S. 439 (1988), for example, we expressly distinguished Sherbert on the ground that the First Amendment does not “require the Government itself to behave in ways that the individual believes will further his or her spiritual development .... The Free Exercise Clause simply cannot be understood to require the Government to conduct its own internal affairs in ways that comport with the religious beliefs of particular citizens.” Roy, supra, at 699; see Lyng, supra, at 449. This distinction makes sense because “the Free Exercise Clause is written in terms of what the government cannot do to the individual, not in terms of what the individual can exact from the government.” Sherbert, supra, at 412 (Douglas, J., concurring). Because the case sub judice, like the other cases in which we have applied Sherbert, plainly falls into the former category, I would apply those established precedents to the facts of this case.
with whom Justice Brennan and Justice Marshall join, dissenting.
Until today, I thought this was a settled and inviolate principle of this Court’s First Amendment jurisprudence. The majority, however, perfunctorily dismisses it as a “constitutional anomaly.” Ante, at 886. As carefully detailed in Justice O’Connor’s concurring opinion, ante, p. 891, the majority is able to arrive at this view only by mischaracterizing this Court’s precedents. The Court discards leading free exercise cases such as Cantwell v. Connecticut, 310 U. S. 296 (1940), and Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U. S. 205 (1972), as “hybrid.” Ante, at 882. The Court views traditional free exercise analysis as somehow inapplicable to criminal prohibitions (as opposed to conditions on the receipt of benefits), and to state laws of general applicability (as opposed, presumably, to laws that expressly single out religious practices). Ante, at 884-885. The Court cites cases in which, due to various exceptional circumstances, we found strict scrutiny inapposite, to hint that the Court has repudiated that standard altogether. Ante, at 882-884. In short, it effectuates a wholesale overturning of settled law concerning the Religion Clauses of our Constitution. One hopes that the Court is aware of the consequences, and that its result is not a product of overreaction to the serious problems the country’s drug crisis has generated.
Justice O’Connor seeks to distinguish Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective Assn., 485 U. S. 439 (1988), and Bowen v. Roy, 476 U. S. 693 (1986), on the ground that those cases involved the government's conduct of “its own internal affairs,” which is different because, as Justice Douglas said in Sherbert, “ ‘the Free Exercise Clause is written in terms of what the government cannot do to the individual, not in terms of what the individual can exact from the government.’ ” Post, at 900 (O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment), quoting Sherbert v. Verner, 374 U. S. 398, 412 (1963) (Douglas, J., concurring). But since Justice Douglas voted with the majority in Sherbert, that quote obviously envisioned that what “the government cannot do to the individual” includes not just the prohibition of an individual’s freedom of action through criminal laws but also the running of its programs (in Sherbert, state unemployment compensation) in such fashion as to harm the individual’s religious interests. Moreover, it is hard to see any reason in principle or practicality why the government should have to tailor its health and safety laws to conform to the diversity of religious belief, but should not have to tailor its management of public lands, Lyng, supra, or its administration of welfare programs, Roy, supra.
Justice O’Connor suggests that “[t]here is nothing talismanic about neutral laws of general applicability,” and that all laws burdening religious practices should be subject to compelling-interest scrutiny because “the First Amendment unequivocally makes freedom of religion, like freedom from race discrimination and freedom of speech, a ‘constitutional nor[m],’ not an ‘anomaly.’” Post, at 901 (opinion concurring in judgment). But this comparison with other fields supports, rather than undermines, the conclusion we draw today. Just as we subject to the most exacting scrutiny laws that make classifications based on race, see Palmore v. Sidoti, 466 U. S. 429 (1984), or on the content of speech, see Sable Communications of California v. FCC, 492 U. S. 115 (1989), so too we strictly scrutinize governmental classifications based on religion, see McDaniel v. Paty, 435 U. S. 618 (1978); see also Torcaso v. Watkins, 367 U. S. 488 (1961). But we have held that race-neutral laws that have the effect of disproportionately disadvantaging a particular racial group do not thereby become subject to compelling-interest analysis under the Equal Protection Clause, see Washington v. Davis, 426 U. S. 229 (1976) (police employment examination); and we have held that generally applicable laws unconcerned with regulating speech that have the effect of interfering with speech do not thereby become subject to compelling-interest analysis under the First Amendment, see Citizen Publishing Co. v. United States, 394 U. S. 131, 139 (1969) (antitrust laws). Our conclusion that generally applicable, religion-neutral laws that have the effect of burdening a particular religious practice need not be justified by a compelling governmental interest is the only approach compatible with these precedents.
While arguing that we should apply the compelling interest test in this case, Justice O’Connor nonetheless agrees that “our determination of the constitutionality of Oregon’s general criminal prohibition cannot,- and should not, turn on the centrality of the particular religious practice at issue,” post, at 906-907 (opinion concurring in judgment). This means, presumably, that compelling-interest scrutiny must be applied to generally applicable laws that regulate or prohibit any religiously motivated activity, no matter how unimportant to the claimant’s religion. Earlier in her opinion, however, Justice O’Connor appears to contradict this, saying that the proper approach is “to determine whether the burden on the specific plaintiffs before us is constitutionally significant and whether the particular criminal interest asserted by the State before us is compelling.” Post, at 899. “Constitutionally significant burden” would seem to be “centrality” under another name. In any case, dispensing with a “centrality” inquiry is utterly unworkable. It would require, for example, the same degree of “compelling state interest” to impede the practice of throwing rice at church weddings as to impede the practice of getting married in church. There is no way out of the difficulty that, if general laws are to be subjected to a “religious practice” exception, both the importance of the law at issue and the centrality of the practice at issue must reasonably be considered.
Nor is this difficulty avoided by Justice Blackmun’s assertion that “although . . . courts should refrain from delving into questions whether,, as a matter of religious doctrine, a particular practice is ‘central’ to the religion, ... I do not think this means that the courts must turn a blind eye to the severe impact of a State’s restrictions on the adherents of a minority religion.” Post, at 919 (dissenting opinion). As Justice . Blackmun’s opinion proceeds to make clear, inquiry into “severe impact” is no different from inquiry into centrality. He has merely substituted for the question “How important is X to the religious adherent?” the question “How great will be the harm to the religious adherent if X is taken away?” There is no material difference.
Justice O’Connor contends that the “parade of horribles” in the text only “demonstrates . . . that courts have been quite capable of . . . striking] sensible balances between religious liberty and competing state interests.” Post, at 902 (opinion concurring in judgment). But the cases we cite have struck “sensible balances” only because they have all applied the general laws, despite the claims for religious exemption. In any event, Justice O’Connor mistakes the purpose of our parade: it is not to suggest that courts would necessarily permit harmful exemptions from these laws (though they might), but to suggest that courts would constantly be in the business of determining whether the “severe impact” of various laws on religious practice (to use Justice Blackmun’s terminology, post, at 919) or the “constitutional!] significance]” of the “burden on the specific plaintiffs” (to use Justice O’Connor’s terminology, post, at 899) suffices to permit us to confer an exemption. It is a parade of horribles because it is horrible to contemplate that federal judges will regularly balance against the importance of general laws the significance of religious practice.
with whom Justice Marshall joins, and with whom Justice Blackmun and Justice Stevens join except as to Part IV, dissenting.
Indeed, the majority’s language is strangely reminiscent of the argument trumpeted by Justice Scalia in Penry. Justice Scalia, writing for four Members of the Court, argued that “it could not be clearer that Jurek adopted the constitutional rule that the instructions had to render all mitigating circumstances relevant to the jury’s verdict, but that the precise manner of their relevance — the precise effect of their consideration — could be channeled by law.” Penry, stipra, at 355 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). The Court correctly rejected that position in Penry, and its failure to do so today creates considerable ambiguity about which Lockett claims a federal court may hereafter consider on habeas corpus review.
The determination with which the Court refuses to apply this exception to a capital sentencing error is most disturbing and is remarkably insensitive to the fundamental premise upon which our Eighth Amendment jurisprudence is built. This Court has consistently “recognized that the qualitative difference of death from all other punishments requires a correspondingly greater degree of scrutiny of the capital sentencing determination.” California v. Ramos, 463 U. S. 992, 998-999 (1983). If the irrevocable nature of the death penalty is not sufficient to counsel against application of Justice Harlan’s doctrine of limited retroactivity for collateral review altogether, it should at least inform the determination of the proper scope of the second Teague exception in capital cases. Moreover, the majority’s insistence that a rule must enhance the accuracy of the factfinding process in order to fit within the second exception is difficult to justify in the context of capital sentencing. The decision whether to impose the death penalty represents a moral judgment about the defendant’s culpability, not a factual finding. See Teague, supra, at 321 (Stevens, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment) (“[A] touchstone of factual innocence would provide little guidance in . . . cases, such as those challenging the constitutionality of capital sentencing hearings”). Cf. Smith v. Murray, 477 U. S. 527, 537 (1986). Thus, the scope of the exception should be tailored to the unique nature of the sentencing decision.
For the same reasons that Lockett and Eddings compel the conclusion that respondent does not seek a “new rule” under Teague, these cases also compel the conclusion that respondent was denied an individualized sentencing determination as required by the Eighth Amendment. As Justice O’Con-nor has recognized, “one difficulty with attempts to remove emotion from capital sentencing through [antisympathy] instructions ... is that juries may be misled into believing that mitigating evidence about a defendant’s background or character also must be ignored.” California v. Brown, 479 U. S., at 545-546 (concurring opinion) (citing id., at 555 (Brennan, J., dissenting)). That is exactly what happened in this case: in all likelihood the jury interpreted the anti-sympathy instruction as a command to ignore the mitigating evidence.
As Justice O’Connor has explained, “evidence about the defendant’s background and character is relevant because of the belief, long held by this society, that defendants who commit criminal acts that are attributable to a disadvantaged background, or to emotional and mental problems, may be less culpable than defendants who have no such excuse.” California v. Brown, 479 U. S. 538, 545 (1987) (concurring opinion); see also Penry v. Lynaugh, 492 U. S. 302, 322 (1989) (“Because Penry was mentally retarded . . . and thus less able than a normal adult to control his impulses or to evaluate the consequences of his conduct, and because of his history of childhood abuse, [a] juror could. . . conclude that Penry was less morally ‘culpable than defendants who have no such excuse’ ”). Yet the fact that the evidence is relevant to the jury’s moral judgment about the defendant’s actions does not rule out the possibility that the evidence may also evoke sympathy in the jurors. See California v. Brown, supra, at 548 (Brennan, J., dissenting) (“In forbidding the sentencer to take sympathy into account, this language on its face precludes precisely the response that a defendant’s evidence of character and background is designed to elicit, thus effectively negating the intended effect of the Court’s requirement that all mitigating evidence be considered”). Justice O’Con-nor’s concurrence in California v. Brown, supra, implicitly recognized this possibility. See id,., at 545-546 (“[0]ne difficulty with attempts to remove emotion from capital sentencing ... is that juries may be misled into believing that mitigating evidence about a defendant’s background or character also must be ignored”).
As Justice Marshall ably demonstrates in his dissent in Boyde, the majority engages in a sleight of hand to justify the reformulation of the standard of review. See Boyde, ante, at 387 (Marshall, J., dissenting). But in the end, it is unclear how the majority’s “reasonable likelihood” standard differs from the prior inquiry into how a reasonable juror could have interpreted the instruction. See Boyde, ante, at 392 (Marshall, J., dissenting) (“It is difficult to conceive how a reasonable juror could interpret an instruction unconstitutionally where there is no ‘reasonable likelihood’ that a juror would do so”). To the extent that this new standard is stricter than the standard set forth in Francis, I believe it is “irreconcilable with bedrock due process principles.” Francis, 471 U. S., at 322-323, n. 8. Moreover, a stricter standard is especially inappropriate when reviewing the instructions at the sentencing stage of a capital trial. “In death cases doubts [concerning a juror’s interpretation of an instruction] should be resolved in favor of the accused.” Andres v. United States, 333 U. S. 740, 752 (1948). See also Boyde, ante, at 392-394 (Marshall, •J., dissenting).
with whom Justice Brennan, Justice Marshall, and Justice Blackmun join, dissenting.
We described the second feature of MCFL as the absence of “shareholders or other persons affiliated so as to have a claim on its assets or earnings. This ensures that persons connected with the organization will have no economic disincentive for disassociating with it if they disagree with its political activity.” 479 U. S., at 264. Although the Chamber also lacks shareholders, many of its members may be similarly reluctant to withdraw as members even if they disagree with the Chamber’s political expression, because they wish to benefit from the Chamber’s nonpolitical programs and to establish contacts with other members of the business community. The Chamber’s political agenda is sufficiently distinct from its educational and outreach programs that members who disagree with the former may continue to pay dues to participate in the latter. Justice Kennedy ignores these disincentives for withdrawing as a member of the Chamber, stating only that “[o]ne need not become a member ... to earn a living.” Post, at 710 (Kennedy, J., dissenting). Certainly, members would be disinclined to terminate their involvement with the organization on the basis of less extreme disincentives than the loss of employment. Thus, we are persuaded that the Chamber’s members are more similar to shareholders of a business corporation than to the members of MCFL in this respect.
Justice Brennan’s concurrence would have us believe that the prohibition adopted by Michigan and approved by the Court is a paternalistic measure to protect the corporate shareholders of America. It is designed, we are told, “to avert [the] danger” that “corporate funds drawn from the general treasury — which represents, after all, [the shareholder’s] money,” might be used on behalf of a political candidate he opposes. Ante, at 670 (Brennan, J., concurring). But such solicitude is a most implausible explanation for the Michigan statute, inasmuch as it permits corporations to take as many ideological and political positions as they please, so long as they are not “in assistance of, or in opposition to, the nomination or election of a candidate.” Mich. Comp. Laws § 169.206(1) (1979). That is indeed the Court’s sole basis for distinguishing First National Bank of Boston v. Bellotti, 435 U. S. 765 (1978), which invalidated restriction of a corporation’s general political speech. The Michigan law appears to be designed, in other words, neither to protect shareholders, nor even (impermissibly) to “balance” general political debate, but to protect political candidates. Given the degree of political sophistication that ought to attend the exercise of our constitutional responsibilities, it is regrettable that this should come as a surprise.
The Court thus holds, for the first time since Justice Holmes left the bench, that a direct restriction upon speech is narrowly enough tailored if it extends to speech that has the mere potential for producing social harm. NRWC (which in any event involved not a direct restriction upon corporate speech but a restriction upon corporate solicitation of funds for candidates) is no authority for that startling proposition, since it did not purport to be applying the First Amendment narrow-tailoring requirement. The principle the Court abandons today — that the mere potential for harm does not justify a restriction upon speech — had its origin in the “clear and present danger” test devised by Justice Holmes in 1919, see Schenck v. United States, 249 U. S. 47, 49-51, and championed by him and Justice Brandéis over the next decade in a series of famous opinions opposing the affirmance of convictions for subversive speech, see Abrams v. United States, 250 U. S. 616, 624 (1919) (Holmes, J., dissenting); Gitlow v. New York, 268 U. S. 652, 672 (1925) (Holmes, J., dissenting); Whitney v. California, 274 U. S. 357, 374 (1927) (Brandeis, J., concurring). The Court finally adopted their view in 1937, see Herndon v. Lowry, 301 U. S. 242, 258; see also Bridges v. California, 314 U. S. 252, 263 (1941); Thornhill v. Alabama, 310 U. S. 88, 105 (1940); West Virginia Board of Education v. Barnette, 319 U. S. 624, 639 (1943); Terminiello v. Chicago, 337 U. S. 1, 4-5 (1949). Today’s reversal of field will require adjustment of a fairly large number of significant First Amendment holdings. Presumably the State may now convict individuals for selling books found to have a potentially harmful influence on minors, Butler v. Michigan, 352 U. S. 380 (1957), ban indecent telephone communications that have the potential for reaching minors, Sable Communications of California v. FCC, 492 U. S. 115 (1989), restrain the press from publishing information that has the potential for jeopardizing a criminal defendant’s right to a fair trial, Nebraska Press Assn. v. Stuart, 427 U. S. 539 (1976), or the potential for damaging the reputation of the subject of an investigation, Landmark Communications, Inc. v. Virginia, 435 U. S. 829 (1978), compel publication of the membership lists of organizations that have a potential for illegal activity, see NAACP v. Alabama ex rel. Patterson, 357 U. S. 449, 464 (1958), and compel an applicant for bar membership to reveal her political beliefs and affiliations to eliminate the potential for subversive activity, Baird v. State Bar of Arizona, 401 U. S. 1 (1971).
Justice Kennedy, with whom Justice O’Connor and Justice Scalia join, dissenting.
An independent ground for invalidating this statute is the blanket exemption for media corporations. It is beyond peradventure that the media could not be prohibited from speaking about candidate qualifications. The First Amendment would not tolerate a law prohibiting a newspaper or television network from spending on political comment because it operates through a corporation. See Mills v. Alabama, 384 U. S. 214, 218-220 (1966). As Justice Brennan, supported by a majority of the Court in Dun & Bradstreet, Inc. v. Greenmoss Builders, Inc., 472 U. S. 749 (1985), stated: “[T]he rights of the institutional media are no greater and no less than those enjoyed by other individuals or organizations engaged in the same activities.” Id., at 784 (dissenting opinion, joined by Marshall, Blackmun, and Stevens, JJ.); id., at 773 (White, J., concurring in judgment) (“[T]he First Amendment gives no more protection to the press . . . than it does to others exercising their freedom of speech”). The argument relied on by the majority, that media corporations are in the business of communicating and other corporations are not, is unsatisfying. All corporations communicate with the public to some degree, whether it is their business or not; and communication is of particular importance for nonprofit corporations.
In addition, the Michigan law protects dissenting shareholders of business corporations that are members of the Chamber to the extent that such shareholders oppose the use of their money, paid as dues to the Chamber out of general corporate treasury funds, for political campaigns. See MCFL, supra, at 260-261; cf. post, at 686 (Scalia, J., dissenting). The Michigan law prevents the Chamber from “serv[ing] as a conduit for corporate political spending.” Ante, at 664. Even Justice Kennedy, by repeatedly using the qualifier “nonprofit” throughout his opinion, appears to concede that the Michigan law legitimately may be applied to for-profit business corporations, or at least that the Court’s rationale might “suffice to justify restricting political speech by for-profit corporations.” Post, at 703 (dissenting opinion). If that is so, Justice Kennedy’s failure to sustain the statute as applied in this case is perplexing, because the Chamber, unlike other nonprofits such as MCFL, is clearly a conduit for corporations barred from making independent expenditures directly. A corporation cannot under Michigan law make a contribution to a PAC out of its general treasury funds, see ante, at 664, n. 3, and we have upheld similar rules restricting the groups from whom PAC’s may solicit contributions. See FEC v. National Right to Work Committee, 459 U. S., at 207-211; California Medical Assn. v. FEC, 453 U. S. 182, 193-199 (1981) (plurality opinion). It is common ground that a segregated fund, even if it is a “nonprofit corporation,” cannot be used as a conduit for independent expenditures by business corporations; I find it unremarkable that the Chamber and other nonprofits cannot perform such a function either.
Of course, a member could resign from the Chamber and a stockholder could divest from a business corporation that used the Chamber as a conduit, but these options would impose a financial sacrifice on those objecting to political expenditures. See MCFL, 479 U. S., at 260. It is therefore irrelevant that “[t]o the extent that members disagree with a nonprofit corporation’s policies, they can seek change from within, withhold financial support, cease to associate with the group, or form a rival group of their own.” Post, at 710 (Kennedy, J., dissenting). Moreover, none of the alternatives proposed by Justice Kennedy would protect a captive stockholder of a business corporation that used the Chamber as a conduit. While the State may have no constitutional duty to protect the objecting Chamber member and corporate shareholder in the absence of state action, cf. Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, 431 U. S. 209, 232-237 (1977), the State surely has a compelling interest in preventing a corporation it has chartered from exploiting those who do not wish to contribute to the Chamber’s political message. “A’s right to receive information does not require the state to permit B to steal from C the funds that alone will enable B to make the communication.” Brudney, Business Corporations and Stockholders’ Rights Under the First Amendment, 91 Yale L. J. 235, 247 (1981). Cf. Communications Workers v. Beck, 487 U. S. 735 (1988); Machinists v. Street, 367 U. S. 740 (1961). We have long recognized the importance of state corporate law in “protect[ing] the shareholders” of corporations chartered within the State. CTS Corp. v. Dynamics Corp. of America, 481 U. S. 69, 91 (1987).
Justice Kennedy is mistaken when he suggests that by upholding the as-applied challenge in MCFL and rejecting it here, we are embarking on “value-laden, content-based speech suppression that permits some nonprofit corporate groups but not others to engage in political speech.” Post, at 695-696 (Kennedy, J., dissenting). The mere fact that some as-applied challenges succeed while others fail does not create a system of “speech suppression.” Whether an organization presents the threat at which the campaign finance laws are aimed has to do with the particular characteristics of the organization at issue and not with the content of its speech. Of course, if a correlation between the two factors could be shown to exist, a group would be free to mount a First Amendment challenge on that basis. Cf. Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 97, n. 131 (1976). Neither appellee nor Justice Kennedy’s dissent has provided any reason to believe that such a relationship exists here.
Justice Scalia also maintains that protection of dissenting shareholders cannot qualify as a valid state interest because shareholders purchase their stock on the understanding that the corporation will use their money for any profitmaking purpose, including support for political candidates with whom the shareholders may not agree. See post, at 686-687. We have already rejected this argument in the context of labor unions. See Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, 431 U. S. 209, 234-235 (1977); Machinists v. Street, 367 U. S. 740, 764 (1961). Rather than assuming that an employee accepts as “the deal,” post, at 686, that the union will use his dues for any purpose that will advance the interests of the bargaining unit, including political contributions and expenditures, we have determined that “the authority to impose dues and fees [is] restricted at least to the ‘extent of denying the unions the right, over the employee’s objection, to use his money to support political causes which he opposes,’. . . even though Congress was well aware that unions had historically expended funds in the support of political candidates and issues.” Ellis v. Railway Clerks, 466 U. S. 435, 447 (1984) (quoting Street, supra, at 768) (emphasis added).
As Justice Stevens notes in his concurring opinion today, post, at' 678-679, n., our decision in Bellotti expressly distinguished “state and federal laws regulating corporate participation in partisan candidate elections.” 435 U. S., at 788, n. 26 (emphasis added).
with whom Justice Brennan, Justice Marshall, and Justice Blackmun join, dissenting.
This Court has held that the Contract Clause and Due Process Clause do not prevent legislatures from altering the statutory rate of post-judgment interest applicable to judgments that have not been satisfied. See Missouri & Arkansas Lumber & Mining Co. v. Greenwood Dist. of Sebastian County, Ark., 249 U. S. 170 (1919); Morley v. Lake Shore & Michigan & Southern R. Co., 146 U. S. 162 (1892); cf. Funkhouser v. J. B. Preston Co., 290 U. S. 163 (1933); League v. Texas, 184 U. S. 156, 161 (1902). The Court does not say that it casts any doubt on these decisions. However, if the Court is correct that Kaiser’s expectations about the rate of postjudgment interest truly became fixed upon entry of judgment, Congress might not have had the power to alter that rate even as to interest that accrued after the effective date of new § 1961. See Morley, supra, at 176 (Harlan, J., dissenting) (making this point). Kaiser might have had a constitutionally protected property right in the earlier postjudgment interest rate. Cf. Logan v. Zimmerman Brush Co., 455 U. S. 422 (1982). When, in Morley, Justice Harlan argued that a plaintiff’s right to New York’s statutory rate of postjudgment interest had vested before the repeal of the interest statute, he stressed words in the old New York statute very similar to the words of § 1961 emphasized by the majority today, that every judgment should bear interest “ ‘from the time when it is entered.’ ” 146 U. S., at 172 (emphasis added). Of course, Justice Harlan's argument was rejected by the Court.
with whom Justice Kennedy joins, concurring.
with whom Justice Brennan joins as to Part II, concurring in the judgment.
Justice Scalia’s assertion, post, at 801, 807 (dissenting opinion), that the question presented is whether “substantial evidence” supported the Board’s “factual finding” that a good-faith doubt was not established in this case misconstrues the issue. The question on which we granted the Board’s petition for certiorari is whether, in assessing whether a particular employer possessed a good-faith doubt, the Board must adopt a general presumption of replacement opposition to the union. See Pet. for Cert. I (“Whether, in assessing the reasonableness of an employer’s asserted doubt that an incumbent union enjoys continued majority support, the Board may refuse to apply any presumption regarding the extent of union support among replacements for striking employees”). Accord, Brief for Petitioner I. Whether the Board permissibly refused to adopt a general presumption applicable to all cases of this type is not an evidentiary question concerning the facts of this particular ease. The substantial evidence standard is therefore inapplicable to the issue before us. Rather, we must determine whether the Board’s refusal to adopt the presumption is rational and consistent with the Act. NLRB v. Baptist Hospital, Inc., 442 U. S. 773, 787 (1979) (“[T]he courts have the duty to review the Board’s presumptions both ‘for consistency with the Act, and for rationality’ ”) (quoting Beth Israel Hospital v. NLRB, 437 U. S. 483, 501 (1978)). Whether substantial evidence supports the Board’s finding that respondent did not possess an objectively reasonable doubt is a question for the Court of Appeals to consider, without applying any presumption about replacements’ views, on remand.
Justice Scalia characterizes this view as “embarrassingly wide of the mark” and asserts, without any factual support, that unions “almost certainly]” demand displacement of striker replacements. Post, at 808 (dissenting opinion). We are confident that the Board, with its vast reservoir of experience in resolving labor disputes, is better situated than members of this Court to determine the frequency with which unions demand displacement of striker replacements.
Justice Scalia appears to misunderstand our position. See post, at 810-811 (dissenting opinion). We do not mean that the replacements’ attitudes toward the union after the strike are relevant to the Board’s determination. Rather, we mean only that during the strike a replacement may foresee that his interests favor representation by the union after the strike. Thus, even if he opposes the strike itself, he may nevertheless want the union to continue to represent the unit because of the benefits that will accrue to him from representation after the strike.
Thus, assuming for the sake of argument that Justice Scalia’s supposition, post, at 808 (dissenting opinion), that unions “almost certain[ly]” demand displacement of all strike replacements is true, such demands will be a factor in the Board’s analysis in most cases. There is no reason, however, to force the Board to apply a presumption based on the premise that unions always make such demands when cases such as the one before us demonstrate that this premise is false.
Justice Scalia entirely ignores the Board’s policy considerations, apparently on the rationale that policy is an illegitimate factor in the Board’s decision. See post, at 812-813 (dissenting opinion). This argument is founded on the premise that the issue before us is the factual question whether substantial evidence supports the Board’s finding that respondent lacked a good-faith doubt. As stated earlier, however, see supra at 778-779, n. 2, the real question is whether the Board must, in assessing the objective reasonableness of an employer’s doubt, adopt a particular presumption. Certainly the Board is entitled to consider both whether the presumption is factually justified and whether that presumption would dis-serve the Act’s policies. See Baptist Hospital, 442 U. S., at 787. We need not determine whether the Board’s policy considerations alone would justify its refusal to adopt the presumption urged by respondent because we find the Board's decision not irrational as a factual matter. See supra, at 788-793.
with whom Justice O’Connor and Justice Kennedy join, dissenting.
with whom Justice Brennan and Justice Marshall join, dissenting.
with whom Justice Marshall joins, dissenting.
Justice Stevens contends that § 7117(a)(1) bars negotiation over the Union’s proposal for yet another reason, namely, that the proposal covers a matter that is “the subject” of a “‘Government-wide rule or regulation.’” Post, at 938 (dissenting opinion). This argument not only was not raised or considered below, but has not even been raised by the IRS here. We decline to address it.
with whom Justice Scalia joins, concurring.
Justice BLACKMUN, with whom Justice BRENNAN and Justice MARSHALL join, dissenting.
with whom Justice Marshall joins, dissenting.
Justice White asserts that the PDA did not alter the BFOQ defense. Post, at 218. He arrives at this conclusion by ignoring the second clause of the Act, which states that “women affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions shall be treated the same for all employment-related purposes ... as other persons not so affected but similar in their ability or inability to work.” 42 U. S. C. § 2000e(k). Until this day, every Member of this Court had acknowledged that “[t]he second clause [of the PDA] could not be clearer: it mandates that pregnant employees ‘shall be treated the same for all employment-related purposes’ as nonpregnant employees similarly situated with respect to their ability or inability to work.” California Federal Savings and Loan Assn. v. Guerra, 479 U. S. 272, 297 (1987) (White, J., dissenting). Justice White now seeks to read the second clause out of the Act.
with whom The Chief Justice and Justice Kennedy join, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
with whom Justice Scalia joins, dissenting.
with whom Justice White and Justice Marshall join, dissenting.
“Mr. Justice Holmes’ test was never intended ‘to express a technical legal doctrine or to convey a formula for adjudicating cases.’ Pennekamp v. Florida, 328 U. S. 331, 353 (1946) (Frankfurter, J., concurring). Properly applied, the test requires a court to make its own inquiry into the imminence and magnitude of the danger said to flow from the particular utterance and then to balance the character of the evil, as well as its likelihood, against the need for free and unfettered expression. The possibility that other measures will serve the State’s interests should also be weighed.” Landmark Communications, Inc. v. Virginia, supra, at 842-843.
Chief Justice Rehnquist delivered the opinion of the Court with respect to Parts I and II, and delivered a dissenting opinion with respect to Part III, in which Justice White, Justice Scalia, and Justice Souter join.
It is unquestionable that in the courtroom itself, during a judicial proceeding, whatever right to “free speech” an attorney has is extremely circumscribed. An attorney may not, by speech or other conduct, resist a ruling of the trial court beyond the point necessary to preserve a claim for appeal. Sacher v. United States, 343 U. S. 1, 8 (1952) (criminal trial); Fisher v. Pace, 336 U. S. 155 (1949) (civil trial). Even outside the courtroom, a majority of the Court in two separate opinions in the case of In re Sawyer, 360 U. S. 622 (1959), observed that lawyers in pending cases were subject to ethical restrictions on speech to which an ordinary citizen would not be. There, the Court had before it an order affirming the suspension of an attorney from practice because of her attack on the fairness and impartiality of a judge. The plurality opinion, which found the discipline improper, concluded that the comments had not in fact impugned the judge’s integrity. Justice Stewart, who provided the fifth vote for reversal of the sanction, said in his separate opinion that he could not join any possible “intimation that a lawyer can invoke the constitutional right of free speech to immunize himself from even-handed discipline for proven unethical conduct.” Id., at 646. He said that “[ojbedience to ethical precepts may require abstention from what in other circumstances might be constitutionally protected speech.” Id., at 646-647. The four dissenting Justices who would have sustained the discipline said:
“He is an intimate and trusted and essential part of the machinery of justice, an ‘officer of the court' in the most compelling sense.” Id., at 666, 668 (Frankfurter, J., dissenting, joined by Clark, Harlan, and Whittaker, JJ.).
We think that the quoted statements from our opinions in In re Sawyer, 360 U. S. 622 (1959), and Sheppard v. Maxwell, supra, rather plainly indicate that the speech of lawyers representing clients in pending cases may be regulated under a less demanding standard than that established for regulation of the press in Nebraska Press Assn. v. Stuart, 427 U. S. 539 (1976), and the cases which preceded it. Lawyers representing clients in pending cases are key participants in the criminal justice system, and the State may demand some adherence to the precepts of that system in regulating their speech as well as their conduct. As noted by Justice Brennan in his concurring opinion in Nebraska Press, which was joined by Justices Stewart and MARSHALL, “[a]s officers of the court, court personnel and attorneys have a fiduciary responsibility not to engage in public debate that will redound to the detriment of the accused or that will obstruct the fair administration of justice.” Id., at 601, n. 27. Because lawyers have special access to information through discovery and client communications, their extrajudicial statements pose a threat to the fairness of a pending proceeding since lawyers’ statements are likely to be received as especially authoritative. See, e. g., In re Hinds, 90 N. J. 604, 627, 449 A. 2d 483, 496 (1982) (statements by attorneys of record relating to the case “are likely to be considered knowledgeable, reliable and true” because of attorneys’ unique access to information); In re Rachmiel, 90 N. J. 646, 656, 449 A. 2d 505, 511 (1982) (attorneys’ role as advocates gives them “extraordinary power to undermine or destroy the efficacy of the criminal justice system”). We agree with the majority of the States that the “substantial likelihood of material prejudice” standard constitutes a constitutionally permissible balance between the First Amendment rights of attorneys in pending cases and the State’s interest in fair trials.
The Arizona Supreme Court has construed this aggravating factor as applying whenever “the expectation of financial gain was a cause of the murders.” State v. Clark, 126 Ariz., at 436, 616 P. 2d, at 896. The court in Clark rejected the specially concurring justice’s position, id., at 437, 616 P. 2d, at 897, that this aggravating circumstance applied only to murders committed by hired killers.
[For dissenting opinion of Justice Brennan, see ante, p. 674.]
For opinion of Justice Blackmun, concurring in part and dissenting in part, see ante, p. 568.
with whom Justice Marshall and Justice Blackmun join, dissenting.
In other words, the exclusion of “fighting words” from the scope of the First Amendment simply means that, for purposes of that Amendment, the unprotected features of the words are, despite their verbal character, essentially a “non-speech” element of communication. Fighting words are thus analogous to a noisy sound truck: Each is, as Justice Frankfurter recognized, a “mode of speech,” Niemotko v. Maryland, 340 U. S. 268, 282 (1951) (opinion concurring in result); both can be used to convey an idea; but neither has, in and of itself, a claim upon the First Amendment. As with the sound truck, however, so also with fighting words: The government may not regulate use based on hostility — or favoritism — towards the underlying message expressed. Compare Frisby v. Schultz, 487 U. S. 474 (1988) (upholding, against facial challenge, a content-neutral ban on targeted residential picketing), with Carey v. Brown, 447 U. S. 455 (1980) (invalidating a ban on residential picketing that exempted labor picketing).
Justice White concedes that a city council cannot prohibit only those legally obscene works that contain criticism of the city government, post, at 406, but asserts that to be the consequence, not of the First Amendment, but of the Equal Protection Clause. Such content-based discrimination would not, he asserts, “be rationally related to a legitimate government interest.” Ibid. But of course the only reason that government interest is not a “legitimate” one is that it violates the First Amendment. This Court itself has occasionally fused the First Amendment into the Equal Protection Clause in this fashion, but at least with the acknowledgment (which Justice White cannot afford to make) that the First Amendment underlies its analysis. See Police Dept. of Chicago v. Mosley, 408 U. S. 92, 95 (1972) (ordinance prohibiting only nonlabor picketing violated the Equal Protection Clause because there was no “appropriate governmental interest” supporting the distinction inasmuch as “the First Amendment means that government has no power to restrict expression because of its message, its ideas, its subject matter, or its content”); Carey v. Brown, 447 U. S. 455 (1980). See generally Simon & Schuster, Inc. v. Members of N. Y. State Crime Victims Bd., 502 U. S. 105, 124 (1991) (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment).
A plurality of the Court reached a different conclusion with regard to the Tennessee antieleetioneering statute considered earlier this Term in Burson v. Freeman, 504 U. S. 191 (1992). In light of the “logical connection” between electioneering and the State’s compelling interest in preventing voter intimidation and election fraud — an inherent connection borne out by a “long history” and a “widespread and time-tested consensus,” id,., at 206, 208, n. 10, 211 — the plurality concluded that it was faced with one of those “rare case[s]” in which the use of a facially content-based restriction was justified by interests unrelated to the suppression of ideas, id., at 211; see also id., at 213 (Kennedy, J., concurring). Justice White and Justice Stevens are therefore quite mistaken when they seek to convert the Burson plurality’s passing comment that “[t]he First Amendment does not require States to regulate for problems that do not exist,” id., at 207, into endorsement of the revolutionary proposition that the suppression of particular ideas ean b'e justified when only those ideas have been a source of trouble in the past. Post, at 405 (White, J., concurring in judgment); post, at 434 (Stevens, J., concurring in judgment).
with whom Justice Blackmun, Justice Stevens, and Justice Kennedy join, dissenting.
I am not so sure. “Poverty” may well be a human condition in its “primary sense,” ibid., but I doubt that using the word in connection with an artificial entity departs in any significant way from settled principles of English usage. One certainly need not search long or far to find examples of the use of “poor” in connection with nonhuman entities — and, indeed, in connection with the very entities listed in 1 U. S. C. § 1. No less a figure than Justice Holmes had occasion to write that the issuance of stock dividends renders a corporation “no poorer” than it was before their distribution, Towne v. Eisner, 245 U. S. 418, 426 (1918), and other judges have used the word “poor” (or one of its derivatives) in a similar fashion, see, e. g., Ordinetz v. Springfield Family Center, Inc., 142 Vt. 466, 468, 457 A. 2d 282, 283 (1983) (“[A] nonprofit corporation may be ... wealthy or impoverished”); In re Whitley v. Klauber, 51 N. Y. 2d 555, 579, 416 N. E. 2d 569, 581 (1980) (Fuchsberg, J., dissenting) (“[T]he corporation is no richer or poorer for the transaction”). More important for our purposes, Congress itself has used the word “poor” to describe entities other than natural persons, referring in at least two provisions of the United States Code to the world’s “poorest countries” — a term that is used as a synonym for the least developed of the so-called “developing” countries. See 22 U. S. C. §§262p-4f(a)(3), 2151d(d)(4). If Congress has seen fit to describe a country as “poor,” I see no reason for concluding that the notion of a “poor” corporation, partnership, or association ought not to be “imputed to Congress.” Ante, at 203.
Justice Frankfurter, although dissenting on other grounds, agreed that Klapprott’s allegations of inability to comply with earlier deadlines took his case outside the scope of “excusable neglect” “because ‘neglect’ in the context of its subject matter carries the idea of negligence and not merely of non-action.” Id., at 630, 69 S.Ct., at 398.
Justice O’CONNOR, with whom Justice SCALIA, Justice SOUTER and Justice THOMAS join, dissenting.
If the 1970 and 1975 reenactments had left any doubt as to congressional intent, that doubt would be set aside by the 1982 amendments to § 2. Between 1975 and 1982, the Court continued to interpret the Voting Rights Act in the broad manner set out by Allen. See City of Rome v. United States, 446 U. S. 156 (1980); Dougherty County Bd. of Ed. v. White, 439 U. S. 32 (1978); United Jewish Organizations of Williamsburgh, Inc. v. Carey, 430 U. S. 144 (1977); Richmond v. United States, 422 U. S. 358 (1975). In Mobile v. Bolden, 446 U. S. 55 (1980), a plurality of this Court concluded that violations of both the Voting Rights Act and the Fifteenth Amendment required discriminatory purpose. The case involved a claim that at-large voting diluted minority voting strength. In his opinion for the plurality in Bolden, Justice Stewart expressly relied upon Gomillion v. Lightfoot’s holding “that allegations of a racially motivated gerrymander of municipal boundaries stated a claim under the Fifteenth Amendment.” 446 U. S., at 62; see also id., at 85-86 (Stevens, J., concurring in judgment). The only reason Gomillion did not control the outcome in Bolden was that an “invidious purpose” had been alleged in the earlier case but not in Bolden. 446 U. S., at 63. The congressional response to Bolden is familiar history. In the 1982 amendment to §2 of the Voting Rights Act, Congress substituted a “results” test for an intent requirement. Pub. L. 97-205, § 3, 96 Stat. 134; see 42 U. S. C. § 1973. It is crystal clear that Congress intended the 1982 amendment to cover nonaccess claims like those in Bolden and Gomillion.
As a consequence, Allen also ensured that courts would be required to confront a number of complex and essentially political questions in assessing claims of vote dilution under the Voting Rights Act. The central difficulty in any vote dilution case, of course, is determining a point of comparison against which dilution can be measured. As Justice Frankfurter observed several years before Allen, “[t]alk of ‘debasement’ or ‘dilution’ is circular talk. One cannot speak of ‘debasement’ or ‘dilution’ of the value of a vote until there is first defined a standard of reference as to what a vote should be worth.” Baker v. Carr, 369 U. S. 186, 300 (1962) (dissenting opinion). See also Thornburg v. Gingles, 478 U. S. 30, 88 (1986) (O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment) (“[I]n order to decide whether an electoral system has made it harder for minority voters to elect the candidates they prefer, a court must have an idea in mind of how hard it ‘should’ be for minority voters to elect their preferred candidates under an acceptable system”). But in setting the benchmark of what “undiluted” or fully “effective” voting strength should be, a court must necessarily make some judgments based purely on an assessment of principles of political theory. As Justice Harlan pointed out in his dissent in Allen, the Voting Rights Act supplies no rule for a court to rely upon in deciding, for example, whether a multimember at-large system of election is to be preferred to a single-member district system; that is, whether one provides a more “effective” vote than another. “Under one system, Negroes have some influence in the election of all officers; under the other, minority groups have more influence in the selection of fewer officers.” Allen, supra, at 586 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). The choice is inherently a political one, and depends upon the selection of a theory for defining the fully “effective” vote — at bottom, a theory for defining effective participation in representative, government. In short, what a court is actually asked to do in a vote dilution case is “to choose among competing bases of representation — ultimately, really, among competing theories of political philosophy.” Baker, supra, at 300 (Frankfurter, J., dissenting).
But “how many” is the critical issue. Once one accepts the proposition that the effectiveness of votes is measured in terms of the control of seats, the core of any vote dilution claim is an assertion that the group in question is unable to control the “proper” number of seats — that is, the number of seats that the minority’s percentage of the population would enable it to control in the benchmark “fair” system. The claim is inherently based on ratios between the numbers of the minority in the population and the numbers of seats controlled. As Justice O’Connor has noted, “any theory of vote dilution must necessarily rely to some extent on a measure of minority voting strength that makes some reference to the proportion between the minority group and the electorate at large.” Gingles, 478 U. S., at 84 (opinion concurring in judgment). As a result, only a mathematical calculation can answer the fundamental question posed by a claim of vote dilution. And once again, in selecting the proportion that will be used to define the undiluted strength of a minority — the ratio that will provide the principle for decision in a vote dilution case — a court must make a political choice.
To achieve that result through the currently fashionable mechanism of drawing majority-minority single-member districts, we have embarked upon what has been aptly characterized as a process of “creating racially ‘safe boroughs.’” United States v. Dallas County Comm’n, 850 F. 2d 1433, 1444 (CA11 1988) (Hill, J., concurring specially), cert. denied, 490 U. S. 1030 (1989). We have involved the federal courts, and indeed the Nation, in the enterprise of systematically dividing the country into electoral districts along racial lines — an enterprise of segregating the races into political homelands that amounts, in truth, to nothing short of a system of “political apartheid.” Shaw, 509 U. S., at 647. See also id., at 657 (noting that racial gerrymandering “may balkanize us into competing racial factions”). Blacks are drawn into “black districts” and given “black representatives”; Hispanics are drawn into Hispanic districts and given “Hispanic representatives”; and so on. Worse still, it is not only the courts that have taken up this project. In response to judicial decisions and the promptings of the Justice Department, the States themselves, in an attempt to avoid costly and disruptive Voting Rights Act litigation, have begun to gerrymander electoral districts according to race. That practice now promises to embroil the courts in a lengthy process of attempting to undo, or at least to minimize, the damage wrought by the system we created. See, e. g., Shaw, supra; Hays v. Louisiana, 839 F. Supp. 1188 (WD La. 1993), appeal pending, No. 93-1539.
The assumptions upon which our vote dilution decisions have been based should be repugnant to any nation that strives for the ideal of a color-blind Constitution. “The principle of equality is at war with the notion that District A must be represented by a Negro, as it is with the notion that District B must be represented by a Caucasian, District C by a Jew, District D by a Catholic, and so on.” Wright v. Rockefeller, 376 U. S. 52, 66 (1964) (Douglas, J., dissenting). Despite Justice Douglas’ warning sounded 30 years ago, our voting rights decisions are rapidly progressing toward a system that is indistinguishable in principle from a scheme under which members of different racial groups are divided into separate electoral registers and allocated a proportion of political power on the basis of race. Cf. id., at 63-66. Under our jurisprudence, rather than requiring registration on racial rolls and dividing power purely on a population basis, we have simply resorted to the somewhat less precise expedient of drawing geographic district lines to capture minority populations and to ensure the existence of the “appropriate” number of “safe minority seats.”
But after the Gingles preconditions have been established, post, at 1008-1009, and after White factors such as a history of discrimination have been found, see post, at 1013, where does the Court turn for a deciding principle to give some meaning to these multifarious facts, which taken individually would each appear to count in favor of a finding of vote dilution? Quite simply, the Court turns to proportionality: “Treating equal political opportunity as the focus of the enquiry, we do not see how these district lines, apparently providing political effectiveness [that is, majority-minority districts] in proportion to voting-age numbers, deny equal political opportunity.” Post, at 1014. See also post, at 1013 (noting that in assessing “dilutive effect,” the “pertinent features” of the districting system at issue “were majority-minority districts in substantial proportion to the minority’s share of voting-age population”); post, at 1025 (O’CONNOR, J., concurring) (the Court’s central teaching in De Grandy “is that proportionality — defined as the relationship between the number of majority-minority voting districts and the minority group’s share of the relevant population — is always relevant evidence in determining vote dilution”). Justice O’Connor’s comment about the Court’s holding in Davis v. Bandemer, 478 U. S. 109 (1986), is equally applicable to the course pursued in De Grandy today: “[The Court’s decision] ultimately rests on a political preference for proportionality — . . . a conviction that the greater the departure from proportionality, the more suspect an apportionment plan becomes.” 478 U. S., at 159 (opinion concurring in judgment).
Justice O’Connor agreed with Justice Brennan in Gingles that, insofar as determining political cohesion was concerned, the cause for a correlation between race and candidate preference was irrelevant. She maintained, however, that evidence of the cause of the correlation would still be relevant to the overall vote dilution inquiry and particularly to the question whether a white majority will usually vote to defeat the minority’s preferred candidate. See 478 U. S., at 100 (opinion concurring in judgment). The splintering of opinions in Gingles on this point has produced, at best, “uncertainty,” Overton v. Austin, 871 F. 2d 529, 538 (CA5 1989), and has allowed bivariate regression analysis — that is, an analysis that measures merely the correlation between race and candidate preference and that does not directly control for other factors — to become the norm for determining cohesion in vote dilution cases. See id., at 539. But cf. League of United Latin American Citizens v. Clements, 999 F. 2d 831, 850-851 (CA5 1993), cert. denied, 510 U. S. 1071 (1994).
Contrary to Justice Stevens’ suggestions, post, at 958, 962, Gomillion v. Lightfoot, 364 U. S. 339 (1960), does not indicate that the Fifteenth Amendment, in protecting the right to vote, incorporates a concern for anything beyond securing access to the ballot. The Gomillion plaintiffs’ claims centered precisely on access: Their complaint was' not that the weight of their votes had been diminished in some way, but that the boundaries of a city had been drawn to prevent blacks from voting in municipal elections altogether. Id., at 341. Gomillion thus “maintains the distinction between an attempt to exclude Negroes totally from the relevant constituency, and a statute that permits Negroes to vote but which uses the gerrymander to contain the impact of Negro suffrage.” Allen v. State Bd. of Elections, 393 U. S. 544, 589 (1969) (Harlan, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).
In offering two citations to support the sweeping proposition that committee reports provide the authoritative source for legislative intent, Gingles plainly misread the import of our prior decisions. Far from giving an unqualified endorsement of committee reports as a guide to congressional intent, the Court in Garcia v. United States, 469 U. S. 70 (1984), merely indicated that, when resort to legislative history is necessary, it is only committee reports, not the various other sources of legislative history, that should be considered. See id., at 76. The Court, however, carefiilly repeated Justice Jackson’s admonition that “[rjesort to legislative history is only justified where the face of the [statute] is inescapably ambiguous.” Id., at 76, n. 3 (quoting Schwegmann Brothers v. Calvert Distillers Corp., 341 U. S. 384, 395 (1951) (concurring opinion)). Similarly, in Zuber v. Allen, 396 U. S. 168 (1969), we considered the reliability of committee reports only as a relative matter in comparing them to statements made by individual Congressmen during floor debates. See id., at 186.
Of course, throughout this discussion concerning the Court’s inevitable resort to proportionality, I have assumed that effective votes will be measured in terms of control of seats. See n. 29, supra. As Justice O’Con-nor suggests in her opinion in De Grandy, if we were to measure the effectiveness of votes not simply in terms of numbers of seats, but in terms of some more amorphous concept of “access to the political process,” there would be no need to make proportionality “dispositive.” See De Grandy, post, at 1026 (O’Connor, J., concurring). Cf. White, 412 U. S., at 765-766. But Gingles made control of seats the determining factor in dilution claims; that is the measure that has been applied in cases under Gingles, and it remains the measure applied in practice in the cases handed down today. In my view, it is unrealistic to think that the Court will now reverse course and establish some broader understanding of “political effectiveness” under the “totality of circumstances” test, after it consistently has pursued a measure of effective voting that makes electoral results the “linchpin” of dilution claims. See 478 U. S., at 93 (O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment).
Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 provides that “[n]o voting qualification or prerequisite to voting, or standard, practice, or procedure shall be imposed or applied by any State or political subdivision in a manner which results in a denial or abridgement of the right of any citizen of the United States to vote on account of race or color.” 42 U. S. C. § 1973(a). In a § 2 vote dilution suit, along with determining whether the Gingles preconditions are met and whether the totality of the circumstances supports a finding of liability, a court must find a reasonable alternative practice as a benchmark against which to measure the existing voting practice. See post, at 887 (O’Connor, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment). As Justice O’Con-nor explained in Gingles: “The phrase vote dilution itself suggests a norm with respect to which the fact of dilution may be ascertained .... [I]n order to decide whether an electoral system has made it harder for minority voters to elect the candidates they prefer, a court must have an idea in mind of how hard it should be for minority voters to elect their preferred candidates under an acceptable system.” 478 U. S., at 88 (opinion concurring in judgment) (internal quotation marks omitted).
But determining the threshold scope of coverage does not end the inquiry, at least so far as § 2 dilution challenges are concerned. As Justices Kennedy and Blackmun agree, the fact that the size of a governing authority is a “standard, practice, or procedure” does not answer the question whether respondents may maintain a § 2 vote dilution challenge. See ante, at 880 (opinion of Kennedy, J.); post, at 951 (Blackmun, J., dissenting). Section 2 vote dilution plaintiffs must establish that the challenged practice is dilutive. In order for an electoral system to dilute a minority group’s voting power, there must be an alternative system that would provide greater electoral opportunity to minority voters. “Put simply, in order to decide whether an electoral system has made it harder for minority voters to elect the candidates they prefer, a court must have an idea in mind of how hard it ‘should’ be for minority voters to elect their preferred candidates under an acceptable system.” Gingles, 478 U. S., at 88 (O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment). As we have said, “[ujnless minority voters possess the potential to elect representatives in the absence of the challenged structure or practice, they cannot claim to have been injured by that structure or practice.” Id., at 50, n. 17 (emphasis in original); see also id., at 99 (O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment) (“[T]he relative lack of minority electoral success under a challenged plan, when compared with the success that would be predicted under the measure of undiluted minority voting strength the court is employing, can constitute powerful evidence of vote dilution”) (emphasis added).
But §2 dilution challenges raise more difficult questions. This case presents the question whether, in a §2 dilution challenge to size, there can ever be an objective alternative benchmark for comparison. And I agree with Justice Kennedy that there cannot be. As Justice Kennedy points out, ante, at 880, the alternative benchmark is often self-evident. In a challenge to a multimember at-large system, for example, a court may compare it to a system of multiple single-member districts. See Gingles, supra, at 38, 50; Davidson, Minority Vote Dilution: An Overview, in Minority Vote Dilution 5 (C. Davidson ed. 1984). Similarly, a court may assess the dilutive effect of majority vote requirements, numbered posts, staggered terms, residency requirements, or anti-single-shot rules by comparing the election results under a system with the challenged practice to the results under a system without the challenged practice. Cf. City of Rome, supra, at 183-185; U. S. Comm’n on Civil Rights, The Voting Rights Act: Ten Years After, pp. 206-208 (1975); Note, Application of Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act to Runoff Primary Election Laws, 91 Colum. L. Rev. 1127, 1148 (1991). Though there may be disagreements about the precise appropriate alternative practice in these cases, see Gingles, supra, at 88-89 (O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment), there are at least some objectively determinable constraints on the dilution inquiry.
It is true, as the Court notes, that the argument against deciding the constitutional issue in this ease rests on prudential considerations rather than a want of jurisdiction. I think it equally clear, however, that a Court less eager to decide the merits would follow the wise counsel of Justice Brandéis in his deservedly famous concurring opinion in Ashwander v. TVA, 297 U. S. 288, 341 (1936). As he explained, the Court has developed “for its own governance in the eases confessedly within its jurisdiction, a series of rules under which it has avoided passing upon a large part of all the constitutional questions pressed upon it for decision.” Id., at 346. The second of those rules applies directly to this case.
Two justices dissented. They acknowledged that our Mugler line of cases recognizes governmental power to prohibit “noxious” uses of property — i. e., uses of property akin to “public nuisances” — without having to pay compensation. But they would not have characterized the Beachfront Management Act’s “primary purpose [as] the prevention of a nuisance.” 304 S. C., at 395, 404 S. E. 2d, at 906 (Harwell, J., dissenting). To the dissenters, the chief purposes of the legislation, among them the promotion of tourism and the creation of a “habitat for indigenous flora and fauna,” could not fairly be compared to nuisance abatement. Id., at 396, 404 S. E. 2d, at 906. As a consequence, they would have affirmed the trial court’s conclusion that the Act’s obliteration of the value of petitioner’s lots accomplished a taking.
We have never set forth the justification for this rule. Perhaps it is simply, as Justice Brennan suggested, that total deprivation of beneficial use is, from the landowner’s point of view, the equivalent of a physical appropriation. See San Diego Gas & Electric Co. v. San Diego, 450 U. S., at 652 (dissenting opinion). “[F]or what is the land but the profits thereof[?3” 1 E. Coke, Institutes, ch. X, §1 (1st Am. ed. 1812). Surely, at least, in the extraordinary circumstance when no productive or economically beneficial use of land is permitted, it is less realistic to indulge our usual assumption that the legislature is simply “adjusting the benefits and burdens of economic life,” Penn Central Transportation Co., 438 U. S., at 124, in a manner that secures an “average reciprocity of advantage” to everyone concerned, Pennsylvania Coal Co. v. Mahon, 260 U. S., at 415. And the functional basis for permitting the government, by regulation, to affect property values without compensation — that “Government hardly could go on if to some extent values incident to property could not be diminished without paying for every such change in the general law,” id., at 413 — does not apply to the relatively rare situations where the government has deprived a landowner of all economically beneficial uses.
On the other side of the balance, affirmatively supporting a compensation requirement, is the fact that regulations that leave the owner of land without economically beneficial or productive options for its use — typically, as here, by requiring land to be left substantially in its natural state — carry with them a heightened risk that private property is being pressed into some form of public service under the guise of mitigating serious public harm. See, e. g., Annicelli v. South Kingstown, 463 A. 2d 133, 140-141 (R. 1.1983) (prohibition on construction adjacent to beach justified on twin grounds of safety and “conservation of open space”); Morris County Land Improvement Co. v. Parsippany-Troy Hills Township, 40 N. J. 539, 552-553, 193 A. 2d 232, 240 (1963) (prohibition on filling marshlands imposed in order to preserve region as water detention basin and create wildlife refuge). As Justice Brennan explained: “From the government's point of view, the benefits flowing to the public from preservation of open space through regulation may be equally great as from creating a wildlife refuge through formal condemnation or increasing electricity production through a dam project that floods private property.” San Diego Gas & Elec. Co., supra, at 652 (dissenting opinion). The many statutes on the books, both state and federal, that provide for the use of eminent domain to impose servitudes on private scenic lands preventing developmental uses, or to acquire such lands altogether, suggest the practical equivalence in this setting of negative regulation and appropriation. See, e.g., 16 U. S. C. §410ff-l(a) (authorizing acquisition of “lands, waters, or interests [within Channel Islands National Park] (including but not limited to scenic easements)”); §460aa-2(a) (authorizing acquisition of “any lands, or lesser interests therein, including mineral interests and scenic easements” within Sawtooth National Recreation Area); §§3921-3923 (authorizing acquisition of wetlands); N. C. Gen. Stat. § 113A-38 (1990) (authorizing acquisition of, inter alia, “ ‘scenic easements’ ” within the North Carolina natural and scenic rivers system); Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 11-15-101 to 11-15-108 (1987) (authorizing acquisition of “protective easements” and other rights in real property adjacent to State’s historic, architectural, archaeological, or cultural resources).
Exercising restraint, the Court and Justice White assume for the sake of argument that, if a prisoner were to make an exceptionally strong showing of actual innocence, the execution could not go forward. Justice Blackmun, in contrast, would expressly so hold; he would also announce the precise burden of proof. Compare ante, at 417 (opinion of the Court) (We assume, “for the sake of argument in deciding this case, that in a capital case a truly persuasive demonstration of ‘actual innocence’ made after trial would render the execution of a defendant unconstitutional and warrant federal habeas relief if there were no state avenue open to process such a claim”), and ante, at 429 (White, J., concurring in judgment) (assuming that a persuasive showing of actual innocence would render a conviction unconstitutional but explaining that, even under such an assumption, “petitioner would at the very least be required to show that based on proffered newly discovered evidence and the entire record before the jury that convicted him, ‘no rational trier of fact could [find] proof of guilt beyond reasonable doubt.’ Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U. S. 307, 314 (1979)”), with post, at 442 (dissenting opinion) (“I would hold that, to obtain relief on a claim of actual innocence, the petitioner must show that he probably is innocent”). Resolving the issue is neither necessary nor advisable in this case. The question is a sensitive and, to say the least, troubling one. It implicates not just the life of a single individual, but also the State’s powerful and legitimate interest in punishing the guilty, and the nature of state-federal relations. Indeed, as the Court persuasively demonstrates, ante, at 398-417, throughout our history the federal courts have assumed that they should not and could not intervene to prevent an execution so long as the prisoner had been convicted after a constitutionally adequate trial. The prisoner’s sole remedy was a pardon or clemency.
with whom Justice Thomas joins, concurring.
It is important to recall what motivated Members of this Court at the genesis of our modern capital punishment case law. Furman v. Georgia was decided in an atmosphere suffused with concern about race bias in the administration of the death penalty — particularly in Southern States, and most particularly in rape cases. The three petitioners were black. Lucious Jackson was a 21-year-old black man sentenced to death by Georgia for raping a white woman. Elmer Branch was sentenced to death by Texas for the rape of a 65-year-old white widow. William Henry Furman faced the death penalty in Georgia for unintentionally killing a white homeowner during a burglary. See 408 U. S., at 252-253 (Douglas, J., concurring). In his opinion concurring in the Court’s judgment that the death penalty in these cases was unconstitutional, Justice Douglas stressed the potential role of racial and other illegitimate prejudices in a system where sentencing juries have boundless discretion. He thought it cruel and unusual to apply the death penalty “selectively to minorities . . . whom society is willing to see suffer though it would not countenance general application of the same penalty across the board.” Id., at 245. Citing studies and reports suggesting that “[t]he death sentence [was] disproportionately imposed and carried out on the poor, the Negro, and the members of unpopular groups,” especially in cases of rape, id., at 249-250 (internal quotation marks omitted), Justice Douglas concluded that
Justice Marshall echoed these concerns. See id., at 364-366 (concurring opinion). He wrote that “[rjacial or other discriminations [in sentencing] should not be surprising,” because, in his view, the Court’s earlier decision in McGautha v. California, 402 U. S. 183 (1971), upholding a procedure that had “committed] to the untrammeled discretion of the jury the power to pronounce life or death,” id., at 207, was “an open invitation to discrimination,” 408 U. S., at 365. Justice Stewart also agreed that “if any basis can be discerned for the selection of these few to be sentenced to die, it is the constitutionally impermissible basis of race.” Id., at 310 (concurring opinion).
In the end, Justice Douglas and the other Members of the Court concluded that “[w]e cannot say from facts disclosed in these records that these defendants were sentenced to death because they were black.” Furman, 408 U. S., at 253 (Douglas, J., concurring). See id., at 310 (Stewart, J., concurring) (“racial discrimination has not been proved”). The Court focused more generally on the uncontrolled discretion placed in judges and juries. Such unbridled discretion, it was argued, practically invited sentencers to vent their personal prejudices in deciding the fate of the accused. See Brief for Petitioner in Furman v. Georgia, O. T. 1971, No. 69-5003, p. 12 (“The jury knew nothing else about the man they sentenced, except his age and race”). “Under these laws no standards govern the selection of the penalty. People live or die, dependent on the whim of one man or of 12.” 408 U. S., at 253 (Douglas, J., concurring). Justice Stewart observed that “the petitioners are among a capriciously selected random handful upon whom the sentence of death has in fact been imposed,” and concluded that the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments cannot tolerate sentencing procedures that allow the penalty to be “so wantonly and so freakishly” inflicted. Id., at 309-310 (concurring opinion). The practice of delegating unguided authority — a practice “largely motivated by the desire to mitigate the harshness of the law and to bring community judgment to bear on the sentence” — actually allowed a jury, “in its own discretion and without violating its trust or any statutory policy, [to] refuse to impose the death penalty no matter what the circumstances of the crime.” Id., at 313, 314 (White, J., concurring).
In sum, the Court concluded that in a standardless sentencing scheme there was no “rational basis,” as Justice Brennan put it, to distinguish “the few who die from the many who go to prison.” Id., at 294 (concurring opinion). See also id., at 313 (White, J., concurring) (“no meaningful basis for distinguishing”). It cannot be doubted that behind the Court’s condemnation of unguided discretion lay the specter of racial prejudice — the paradigmatic capricious and irrational sentencing factor.
One would think, however, that by eliminating explicit jury discretion and treating all defendants equally, a mandatory death penalty scheme was a perfectly reasonable legislative response to the concerns expressed in Furman. See Roberts, supra, at 346 (White, J., dissenting). See also Walton v. Arizona, 497 U. S. 639, 662 (1990) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment). Justice White was surely correct in concluding that “a State is not constitutionally forbidden to provide that the commission of certain crimes conclusively establishes that the criminal’s character is such that he deserves death.” Roberts, supra, at 358. See also Roberts v. Louisiana, 431 U. S. 633, 649 (1977) (Rehnquist, J., dissenting); Sumner v. Shuman, 483 U. S. 66, 86 (1987) (White, J., dissenting). I would also agree that the plurality in Woodson and Roberts erred in equating the “raw power of [jury] nullification” with the unlimited sentencing discretion condemned in Furman. Roberts, supra, at 347 (White, J., dissenting). The curious and counterintuitive outcomes of our 1976 cases — upholding sentences of death imposed under statutes that explicitly preserved the sentencer’s discretion while vacating those imposed under mandatory provisions precisely because of a perceived potential for arbitrary and uninformed discretion — might in some measure be attributable, once again, to the powerful influence of racial concerns. Be that as it may, we are not now confronted with a mandatory sentencing provision, and I have no occasion here to flesh out my disagreement with the Court’s prohibition of such schemes.
Together, these notions render meaningless any rational standards by which a State may channel or focus the jury’s discretion and thus negate the central tenet of Furman and all our death penalty cases since 1972. Penry imposes as a constitutional imperative “a scheme that simply dumps before the jury all sympathetic factors bearing upon the defendant’s background and character, and the circumstances of the offense, so that the jury may decide without further guidance” whether the defendant deserves death. Penry, 492 U. S., at 359 (Scalia, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). “It is an unguided, emotional ‘moral response’ that the Court demands be allowed — an outpouring of personal reaction to all the circumstances of a defendant’s life and personality, an unfocused sympathy.” Ibid. Justice Souter’s reading of Penry bears out these fears. His dissent would require that the special issues be “construed with enough scope to allow the full consideration of mitigating potential,” post, at 515, and that the jury be free to give full effect to the defendant’s sympathetic evidence “for all purposes, including purposes not specifically permitted by the questions,” post, at 511 (internal quotation marks and emphasis omitted).
The Court in Penry denied that its holding signaled a return to unbridled jury discretion because, it reasoned, “so long as the class of murderers subject to capital punishment is narrowed, there is no constitutional infirmity in a procedure that allows a jury to recommend mercy based on the mitigating evidence introduced by a defendant.” 492 U. S., at 327 (citing Gregg, 428 U. S., at 197-199, 203 (joint opinion), and 222 (White, J., concurring in judgment)). Cf. McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U. S., at 311 (discussing the benefits to the defendant of discretionary leniency). Thus, the dissent suggests that once the State has sufficiently narrowed the class of death-eligible murderers, the jury’s discretion to select those individuals favored to live must remain effectively unbounded. See post, at 513-515, 518-519. It turns reason on its head, however, to argue that just because we have approved sentencing systems that continue to permit juries to exercise a degree of discretionary leniency, the Eighth Amendment necessarily requires that that discretion be unguided and unlimited with respect to “the class of murderers subject to capital punishment.” To withhold the death penalty out of sympathy for a defendant who is a member of a favored group is no different from a decision to impose the penalty on the basis of negative bias, and it matters not how narrow the class of death-eligible defendants or crimes. Surely that is exactly what the petitioners and the Legal Defense Fund argued in Woodson and Roberts. See n. 7, supra. It is manifest that “ ‘the power to be lenient [also] is the power to discriminate.’ ” McCleskey v. Kemp, supra, at 312 (quoting K. Davis, Discretionary Justice 170 (1973)). See also Roberts, 428 U. S., at 346 (White, J., dissenting) (“It is undeniable that the unfettered discretion of the jury to save the defendant from death was a major contributing factor in the developments which led us to invalidate the death penalty in Furman v. Georgia”).
The rule of Eddings may be an important procedural safeguard that complements Furman, but Eddings cannot promote consistency, much less rationality. Quite the opposite, as Penry demonstrates. It is imperative, therefore, that we give full effect to the standards designed by state legislatures for focusing the sentencer’s deliberations. This Court has long since settled the question of the constitutionality of the death penalty. We have recognized that “capital punishment is an expression of society’s moral outrage at particularly offensive conduct” and that a process for “ ‘channeling th[e] instinct [for retribution] in the administration of criminal justice serves an important purpose in promoting the stability of a society governed by law.’” Gregg, 428 U. S., at 183 (joint opinion) (quoting Furman, supra, at 308 (Stewart, J., concurring)). If the death penalty is constitutional, States must surely be able to administer it pursuant to rational procedures that comport with the Eighth Amendment’s most basic requirements.
with whom Justice Blackmun, Justice Stevens, and Justice O’Connor join, dissenting.
The first distinction between Penry’s claim and that of Graham is the type of mitigating evidence involved. Penry’s went to “mental retardation and abused childhood”; Graham’s involves youthfulness, unfortunate background, and traits of decent character. But any assertion that this should make any difference flies in the face of Justice Kennedy’s opinion from last Term, quoted before, that “a rule of this general application, a rule designed for the specific purpose of evaluating a myriad of factual contexts [will only infrequently] yiel[d] a result so novel that it forges a new rule, one not dictated by precedent.” Wright v. West, 505 U. S., at 309 (opinion concurring in judgment). Nor is the second distinction any more material, that Penry’s evidenc; of retardation could claim no mitigating effect under the second Texas issue, which asks the jury to assess a defendant’s future dangerousness, whereas Graham’s evidence of youth and decency could claim some. The point under Lockett, Eddings, and Penry is that sentencing schemes must allow the sentencer to give full mitigating effect to evidence; Graham’s claim that his evidence could receive only partial consideration is just as much a claim for application of the preexisting rule demanding the opportunity for full effect as was Penry’s claim that his retardation could be given no effect under the second Texas special issue.
The Court’s conclusion to the contrary rests on the assumption that an additional instruction is required under Penry only where there is mitigating evidence without any “mitigating relevance” to the second, future dangerousness special issue. See ante, at 475. But that was not the holding of Penry, which reiterates the Eighth Amendment requirement expressed in Lockett and Eddings that the jury be able “to consider fully [the defendant’s] mitigating evidence,” Penry, 492 U. S., at 323, and requires a separate instruction whenever such evidence “has relevance to ... moral culpability beyond the scope of the special issues,” id., at 322. Indeed, Justice Scalia’s dissent in Penry recognized that “[w]hat the Court means by ‘fully consider’ (what it must mean to distinguish Jurek) is to consider for all purposes, including purposes not specifically permitted by the questions.” Id., at 355 (opinion dissenting in relevant part) (emphasis in original). That dissent argued that this was not what was required by the Constitution, see id., at 358-360, but it correctly described the holding in the Court’s opinion in Penry itself. Nothing in Penry aside from Justice Scalia’s dissent, and nothing in the controlling opinions in Lockett or Eddings, suggested that this Eighth Amendment requirement will be obviated by the happenstance that a defendant’s particular mitigating evidence is relevant to one of the special issues, even though it may have mitigating force beyond the scope of that issue.
“The Court’s decision appears to be based on a fear that the acceptance of McCleskey’s claim would sound the death knell for capital punishment in Georgia. If society were indeed forced to choose between a racially discriminatory death penalty (one that provides heightened protection against murder ‘for whites only’) and no death penalty at all, the choice mandated by the Constitution would be plain. But the Court’s fear is unfounded. One of the lessons of the Baldus study is that there exist certain categories of extremely serious crimes for which prosecutors consistently seek, and juries consistently impose, the death penalty without regard to the race of the victim or the race of the offender. If Georgia were to narrow the class of death-eligible defendants to those categories, the danger of arbitrary and discriminatory imposition of the death penalty would be significantly decreased, if not eradicated. As Justice Brennan has demonstrated in his dissenting opinion, such a restructuring of the sentencing scheme is surely not too high a,price to pay.” McCleskey v. Kemp, 481 U. S. 279, 367 (1987) (Stevens, J., dissenting) (internal citation omitted).
Justice Thomas argues, ante, at 493, that the rule applied in Penry “originated entirely from whole cloth in two recent concurring opinions,” California v. Brown, 479 U. S. 538, 545 (1987) (O’Connor, J., concurring), and Franklin v. Lynaugh, supra, at 185 (O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment), and that it requires “unbridled” jury discretion, even to the point that the death penalty may be withheld on the basis of race, ante, at 494.
There was one novelty in the concurring opinions in Brown and Franklin, however, in the use of the phrase “reasoned moral response,” see supra, at 513, to which Justice Thomas adverts in his concurring opinion. But as the concurring opinion explained in Brown, this is just a shorthand for the individual assessment of personal culpability that Lockett and Eddings mandate. See Brown, supra, at 545. It is, indeed, appropriate shorthand. Justice Thomas himself acknowledges, as I think everyone must, “that ‘capital punishment is an expression of society’s moral outrage at particularly offensive conduct,’ ” ante, at 498 (quoting Gregg v. Georgia, supra, at 183 (joint opinion of Stewart, Powell, and Stevens, JJ.)), and he reminds us that “[a]ny determination that death is or is not the fitting punishment for a particular crime will necessarily be a moral one,” ante, at 494.
It is plain enough, we think, that the joint opinion could reasonably be read as having arrived at this conclusion only after being satisfied that the mitigating evidence introduced by the defendant, including his age, would be given constitutionally adequate consideration in the course of the jury’s deliberation on the three special issues. Three other Justices concurred in the holding that the Texas procedures for imposing the death penalty were constitutional. Id,., at 278-279 (White, J., concurring in judgment).
To be sure, Justice O’Connor’s opinion concurring in the judgment in Franklin expressed “doubts” about the validity of the Texas death penalty statute as that statute might be applied in future cases. Id., at 183. The Justice agreed, however, that the special issues adequately accounted for the mitigating evidence presented in that case. Ibid.
In 1975, the Court finally repudiated the reasoning of Hoyt and struck down, under the Sixth Amendment, an affirmative registration statute nearly identical to the one at issue in Hoyt. See Taylor v. Louisiana, 419 U. S. 522 (1975). We explained: “Restricting jury service to only special groups or excluding identifiable segments playing major roles in the community cannot be squared with the constitutional concept of jury trial.” Id., at 530. The diverse and representative character of the jury must be maintained “‘partly as assurance of a diffused impartiality and partly because sharing in the administration of justice is a phase of civic responsibility.’” Id., at 530-531, quoting Thiel v. Southern Pacific Co., 328 U. S. 217, 227 (1946) (Frankfurter, J., dissenting). See also Duren v. Missouri, 439 U. S. 357 (1979).
Given our recent precedent, the doctrinal basis for Justice Scalia’s dissenting opinion is a mystery. Justice Scalia points out that the discrimination at issue in this case was directed at men, rather than women, but then acknowledges that the Equal Protection Clause protects both men and women from intentional discrimination on the basis of gender. See post, at 157, citing Mississippi Univ. for Women v. Hogan, 458 U. S., at 723-724. He also appears cognizant of the fact that classifications based on gender must be more than merely rational, see post, at 160-161; they must be supported by an “exceedingly persuasive justification,” Hogan, 458 U. S., at 724. Justice Scalia further admits that the Equal Protection Clause, as interpreted by decisions of this Court, governs the exercise of peremptory challenges in every trial, and that potential jurors, as well as litigants, have an equal protection right to nondiscriminatory jury selection procedures. See post, at 158-160, citing Batson, Powers, Edmonson, and McCollum. Justice Scalia does not suggest that we overrule these cases, nor does he attempt to distinguish them. He intimates that discrimination on the basis of gender in jury selection may be rational, see post, at 157, but offers no “exceedingly persuasive justification” for it. Indeed, Justice Scalia fails to advance any justification for his apparent belief that the Equal Protection Clause, while prohibiting discrimination on the basis of race in the exercise of peremptory challenges, allows discrimination on the basis of gender. His dissenting opinion thus serves as a tacit admission that, short of overruling a decade of cases interpreting the Equal Protection Clause, the result we reach today is doctrinally compelled.
Justice O’Connor’s concurring opinion recognizes several of the costs associated with extending Batson to gender-based peremptory challenges — lengthier trials, an increase in the number and complexity of appeals addressing jury selection, and a “diminished . . . ability of litigants to act on sometimes accurate gender-based assumptions about juror attitudes.” Ante, at 149-150. These costs are, in my view, needlessly imposed by the Court’s opinion, because the Constitution simply does not require the result that it reaches.
And damage has been done, secondarily, to the entire justice system, which will bear the burden of the expanded quest for “reasoned peremptories” that the Court demands. The extension of Batson to sex, and almost certainly beyond, cf. Batson, 476 U. S., at 124 (Burger, C. J., dissenting), will provide the basis for extensive collateral litigation, which especially the criminal defendant (who litigates full time and cost free) can be expected to pursue. While demographic reality places some limit on the number of cases in which race-based challenges will be an issue, every case contains a potential sex-based claim. Another consequence, as I have mentioned, is a lengthening of the voir dire process that already burdens trial courts.
Justice SOUTER, with whom Justice BLACKMUN, Justice STEVENS, and Justice GINSBURG join, dissenting.
Recognizing that multiple taxation of international enterprise may occur whatever taxing scheme the State adopts, Justice O’Connor, dissenting in No. 92-1384, finds impermissible under “the [dormant] Foreign Commerce Clause” only double taxation that (1) burdens a foreign corporation in need of protection for lack of access to the political process, and (2) occurs “because [the State] does not conform to international practice.” Post, at 336. But the image of a politically impotent foreign transactor is surely belied by the battalion of foreign governments that has marched to Bar-clays’ aid, deploring worldwide combined reporting in diplomatic notes, amicus briefs, and even retaliatory legislation. See infra, at 324, n. 22; post, at 337. Indeed, California responded to this impressive political activity when it eliminated mandatory worldwide combined reporting. See supra, at 306. In view of this activity, and the control rein Congress holds, see infra, at 329-331, we cannot agree that “international practice” has such force as to dictate this Court’s Commerce Clause jurisprudence. We therefore adhere to the precedent set in Container Corp.
with whom Justice Thomas joins, concurring in the judgment in part and dissenting in part.
It is important to emphasize that the precedents to which I refer, like today’s decision, only construe the statute, and do not purport to assess its constitutional implications. See Chisom v. Roemer, 501 U. S. 380, 418 (1991) (Kennedy, J., dissenting). Operating under the constraints of a statutory regime in which proportionality has some relevance, States might consider it lawful and proper to act with the explicit goal of creating a proportional number of majority-minority districts in an effort to avoid §2 litigation. Likewise, a court finding a § 2 violation might believe that the only appropriate remedy is to order the offending State to engage in race-based redistricting and create a minimum number of districts in which minorities constitute a voting majority. The Department of Justice might require (in effect) the same as a condition of granting preclearance, under § 5 of the Act, 42 U. S. C. § 1973c, to a State’s proposed legislative redistricting. Those governmental actions, in my view, tend to entrench the very practices and stereotypes the Equal Protection Clause is set against. See Metro Broadcasting, Inc. v. FCC, supra, at 636-637 (Kennedy, J., dissenting). As a general matter, the sorting of persons with an intent to divide by reason of race raises the most serious constitutional questions.
In like fashion, Chief Justice Burger observed that the “use of a mathematical formula” to assure a minimum number of majority-minority districts “tends to sustain the existence of ghettos by promoting the notion that political clout is to be gained or maintained by marshaling particular racial, ethnic, or religious groups in enclaves.” United Jewish Organizations v. Carey, 430 U. S., at 186 (dissenting opinion). And last Term in Shaw, we voiced our agreement with these sentiments, observing that “[r]acial gerrymandering, even for remedial purposes, may balkanize us into competing racial factions; it threatens to carry us further from the goal of a political system in which race no longer matters— a goal that the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments embody, and to which the Nation continues to aspire.” 509 U.S., at-657.
with whom Justice Scalia joins, dissenting.
Because “deliberate indifference” is a judicial gloss, appearing neither in the Constitution nor in a statute, we could not accept petitioner’s argument that the test for “deliberate indifference” described in Canton v. Harris, 489 U. S. 378 (1989), must necessarily govern here. In Canton, interpreting Rev. Stat. § 1979, 42 U. S. C. § 1983, we held that a municipality can be liable for failure to train its employees when the municipality’s failure shows “a deliberate indifference to the rights of its inhabitants.” 489 U. S., at 389 (internal quotation marks omitted). In speaking to the meaning of the term, we said that “it may happen that in light of the duties assigned to specific officers or employees the need for more or different training is so obvious, and the inadequacy so likely to result in the violation of constitutional rights, that the policymakers of the city can reasonably be said to have been deliberately indifferent to the need.” Id., at 390; see also id., at 390, n. 10 (elaborating). Justice O’Connor’s separate opinion for three Justices agreed with the Court’s “obvious[ness]” test and observed, that liability is appropriate when policymakers are “on actual or constructive notice” of the need to train, id., at 396 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). It would be hard to describe the Canton understanding of deliberate indifference, permitting liability to be premised on obviousness or constructive notice, as anything but objective.
To begin with, I note my general agreement with Justice Ginsburg’s observation that the “hesitate to act” language is far from helpful, and may in fact make matters worse by analogizing the decision whether to convict or acquit a defendant to the frequently high-risk personal decisions people must make in their daily lives. See ante, at 24 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment). But even assuming this “hesitate to act” language is in some way helpful to a jury in understanding the meaning of reasonable doubt, the existence of an “alternative” and accurate definition of reasonable doubt somewhere in the instruction does not render the instruction lawful if it is “reasonably likely” that the jury would rely on the faulty definition during its deliberations. Boyde, 494 U. S., at 380. Cage itself contained proper statements of the law with respect to what is required to convict or acquit a defendant, but this language could not salvage the instruction since it remained reasonably likely that, despite the proper statements of law, the jury understood the instruction to require “a higher degree of doubt than is required for acquittal under the reasonable doubt standard.” 498 U. S., at 41.
The California instruction was criticized in People v. Brigham, 25 Cal. 3d 283, 292-316, 599 P. 2d 100, 106-121 (1979) (Mosk, J., concurring). Justice Mosk apparently did not think the instruction was unconstitutional, but he “urge[d] the Legislature to reconsider its codification.” Id., at 293, 599 P. 2d, at 106. The California Assembly and Senate responded by requesting the committee on jury instructions of the Los Angeles Superior Court “to study alternatives to the definition of ‘reasonable doubt’ set forth in Section 1096 of the Penal Code, and to report its findings and recommendations to the Legislature.” Cal. Assem. Con. Res. No. 148, 1986 Cal. Stats. 5634. The committee recommended that the legislature retain the statutory definition unmodified, see Alternative Definitions of Reasonable Doubt: A Report of the Committee on Standard Jury Instructions — Criminal to the California Legislature (May 22,1987), and § 1096 has not been changed.
with whom The Chief Justice and Justice Kennedy join, concurring in the judgment.
with, whom Justice Thomas joins, dissenting.
As for our prior jurisprudence: The opinions of Justice Blackmun and Justice O’Connor rely on the Fourteenth Amendment’s guarantee of due process, rather than on the Eighth Amendment’s “cruel and unusual punishments” prohibition, as applied to the States by the Fourteenth Amendment. But cf. ante, at 172 (Souter, J., concurring). The prior law applicable to that subject indicates that petitioner’s due process rights would be violated if he was “sentenced to death ‘on the basis of information which he had no opportunity to deny or explain.’” Skipper v. South Carolina, 476 U. S. 1, 5, n. 1 (1986), quoting Gardner v. Florida, 430 U. S. 349, 362 (1977). Both opinions try to bring this case within that description, but it does not fit.
The rule the majority adopts in order to overturn this sentence therefore goes well beyond what would be necessary to counteract prosecutorial misconduct (a disposition with which I might agree). It is a rule at least as sweeping as this: that the Due Process Clause overrides state law limiting the admissibility of information concerning parole whenever the prosecution argues future dangerousness. Justice Blackmun appears to go even further, requiring the admission of parole ineligibility even when the prosecutor does not argue future dangerousness. See ante, at 163-164; but see ante, at 174 (Ginsburg, J., concurring). I do not understand the basis for this broad prescription. As a general matter, the Court leaves it to the States to strike what they consider the appropriate balance among the many factors— probative value, prejudice, reliability, potential for confusion, among others — that determine whether evidence ought to be admissible. Even in the capital punishment context, the Court has noted that “the wisdom of the decision to permit juror consideration of [postsentencing contingencies] is best left to the States.” California v. Ramos, 463 U. S. 992, 1014 (1983). “[T]he States, and not this Court, retain 'the traditional authority’ to determine what particular evidence . . . is relevant.” Skipper v. South Carolina, 476 U. S., at 11 (Powell, J., concurring in judgment). One reason for leaving it that way is that a sensible code of evidence cannot be invented piecemeal. Each item cannot be considered in isolation, but must be given its place within the whole. Preventing the defense from introducing evidence regarding parolability is only half of the rule that prevents the prosecution from introducing it as well. If the rule is changed for defendants, many will think that evenhandedness demands a change for prosecutors as well. State’s attorneys ought to be able to say that if, ladies and gentlemen of the jury, you do not impose capital punishment upon this defendant (or if you impose anything less than life without parole) he may be walking the streets again in eight years! Many would not favor the admission of such an argument — but would prefer it to a state scheme in which defendants can call attention to the unavailability of parole, but prosecutors cannot note its availability. This Court should not force state legislators into such a difficult choice unless the isolated state evidentiary rule that the Court has before it is not merely less than ideal, but beyond a high threshold of unconstitutionality.
On appeal to the South Carolina Supreme Court, petitioner argued that the trial judge’s refusal to provide the jury accurate information regarding his parole ineligibility violated the Eighth Amendment and the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The South Carolina Supreme Court declined to reach the merits of petitioner’s challenges. With one justice dissenting, it concluded that, regardless of whether a trial court’s refusal to inform a sentencing jury about a defendant’s parole ineligibility might be error under some circumstances, the instruction given to petitioner’s jury “satisfie[d] in substance [petitioner’s] request for a charge on parole ineligibility,” and thus there was no reason to consider whether denial of such an instruction would be constitutional error in this case. 310 S. C. 439, 444, 427 S. E. 2d 175, 179 (1993). We granted certiorari, 510 U. S. 811 (1993).
It can hardly be questioned that most juries lack accurate information about the precise meaning of “life imprisonment” as defined by the States. For much of our country’s history, parole was a mainstay of state and federal sentencing regimes, and every term (whether a term of life or a term of years) in practice was understood to be shorter than the stated term. See generally Lowenthal, Mandatory Sentencing Laws: Undermining the Effectiveness of Determinate Sentencing Reform, 81 Calif. L. Rev. 61 (1993) (describing the development of mandatory sentencing laws). Increasingly, legislatures have enacted mandatory sentencing laws with severe penalty provisions, yet the precise contours of these penal laws vary from State to State. See Cheatwood, The Life-Without-Parole Sanction: Its Current Status and a Research Agenda, 34 Crime & Delinq. 43, 45, 48 (1988). Justice Chandler of the South Carolina Supreme Court observed that it is impossible to ignore “the reality, known to the ‘reasonable juror/ that, historically, life-term defendants have been eligible for parole.” State v. Smith, 298 S. C. 482, 489-490, 381 S. E. 2d 724, 728 (1989) (opinion concurring and dissenting), cert. denied, 494 U. S. 1060 (1990).
with whom Justice Stevens joins, concurring.
The fact that § 501 singles out expressive activity for special regulation heightens the Government’s burden of justification. See Minneapolis Star, 460 U. S., at 583. As we noted last Term when reviewing the Federal Communications Commission’s must-carry rules for cable television systems, “[w]hen the Government defends a regulation on speech as a means to redress past harms or prevent anticipated harms, it must do more than simply ‘posit the existence of the disease sought to be cured.’ ... It must demonstrate that the recited harms are real, not merely conjectural, and that the regulation will in fact alleviate these harms in a direct and material way.” Turner Broadcasting System, 512 U. S., at 664. That case dealt with a direct regulation of communication by private entities, but its logic applies as well to the special burden § 501 imposes on the expressive rights of the multitude of employees it reaches. As Justice Brandéis reminded us, a “reasonable” burden on expression requires a justification far stronger than mere speculation about serious harms. “Fear of serious injury cannot alone justify suppression of free speech and assembly. Men feared witches and burnt women. ... To justify suppression of free speech there must be reasonable ground to fear that serious evil will result if free speech is practiced.” Whitney v. California, 274 U. S. 357, 376 (1927) (concurring opinion). The Government has not persuaded us that § 501(b) is a reasonable response to the posited harms.
As Justice Brennan explained in his dissent in Atascadero State Hospital v. Scanlon, 473 U. S. 234, 259-302 (1985), this language, when read in light of the historical evidence, is properly understood to mean that the grant of diversity jurisdiction found in Article III, §2, does not extend to actions brought by individuals against States. See also Welch v. Texas Dept. of Highways and Public Transp., 483 U. S. 468, 509-516 (1987) (Brennan, J., dissenting). Yet since Hans v. Louisiana, 134 U. S. 1 (1890), the Court has interpreted the Eleventh Amendment as injecting broad notions of sovereign immunity into the whole corpus of federal jurisdiction. The Court’s decisions have given us “two Eleventh Amendments,” one narrow and textual and the other — not truly a constitutional doctrine at all — based on prudential considerations of comity and federalism. See Pennsylvania v. Union Gas Co., 491 U. S. 1, 23-29 (1989) (Stevens, J., concurring).
with whom Justice Stevens, Justice O’Connor, and Justice Ginsburg join, dissenting.
Responding to our colleagues’ diverse opinions dissenting in part, we add a final note. This case presents two issues that run all through the law. First, who decides (here, courts or the DOT, the latter lacking contract dispute resolution resources for the task)? On this question, all agree to this extent: None of the opinions in this case would foist on the DOT work Congress has neither instructed nor funded the Department to do. Second, where is it proper to draw the line (here, between what the ADA preempts, and what it leaves to private ordering, backed by judicial enforcement)? Justice Stevens reads our Morales decision to demand only minimal preemption; in contrast, Justice O’Connor reads the same case to mandate total preemption. The middle course we adopt seems to us best calculated to carry out the congressional design; it also bears the approval of the statute’s experienced administrator, the DOT. And while we adhere to our holding in Morales, we do not overlook that in our system of adjudication, principles seldom can be settled “on the basis of one or two cases, but require a closer working out.” Pound, Survey of the Conference Problems, 14 U. Cin. L. Rev. 324, 339 (1940) (Conference on the Status of the Rule of Judicial Precedent).
Justice Scalia, with whom Justice Thomas joins, concurring in the judgment.
I would therefore allow a State to subsidize its domestic industry so long as it does so from nondiscriminatory taxes that go into the State’s general revenue fund. Perhaps, as some commentators contend, that line comports with an important economic reality: A State is less likely to maintain a subsidy when its citizens perceive that the money (in the general fimd) is available for any number of competing, nonprotectionist, purposes. See Coenen, Untangling the Market-Participant Exemption to the Dormant Commerce Clause, 88 Mich. L. Rev. 395, 479 (1989); Collins, Economic Union as a Constitutional Value, 63 N. Y. U. L. Rev. 43, 103 (1988); Gergen, The Selfish State and the Market, 66 Texas L. Rev. 1097, 1138 (1988); see also ante, at 200, and n. 17. That is not, however, the basis for my position, for as The Chief Justice explains, “[ajnalysis of interest group participation in the political process may serve many useful purposes, but serving as a basis for interpreting the dormant Commerce Clause is not one of them.” Post, at 215 (dissenting opinion). Instead, I draw the line where I do because it is a clear, rational line at the limits of our extant negative-Commerce-Clause jurisprudence.
with whom Justice Black-MUN joins, dissenting.
More than half a century ago, Justice Brandéis said in his dissenting opinion in New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann, 285 U. S. 262, 311 (1932):
Alloyd, as well as Justice Thomas in his dissent, respond that if Congress had intended § 12(2) to govern only initial public offerings, it would have been simple for Congress to have referred to the § 4 exemptions in § 12(2). See Brief for Respondents 25-26; post, at 590 (Thomas, J., dissenting). The argument gets the presumption backwards. Had Congress meant the term “prospectus” in § 12(2) to have a different meaning than the same term in § 10, that is when one would have expected Congress to have been explicit. Congressional silence cuts against, not in favor of, Alloyd’s argument. The burden should be on the proponents of the view that the term “prospectus” means one thing in §12 and another in §10 to adduce strong textual support for that conclusion. And Alloyd adduces none.
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), as ami-cus, and Justice Ginsburg in dissent, rely on what they call the legislative background of the Act to support Alloyd’s construction. With a few minor exceptions, however, their reliance is upon statements by commentators and judges written after the Act was passed, not while it was under consideration. See Brief for SEC as Amicus Curiae 19-23; post, at 599-601 (Ginsburg, J., dissenting). Material not available to the lawmakers is not considered, in the normal course, to be legislative history. After-the-fact statements by proponents of a broad interpretation are not a reliable indicator of what Congress intended when it passed the law, assuming extratextual sources are to any extent reliable for this purpose.
Justice Ginsburg argues that the omission from the 1933 Act of the phrase “offering to the public” that appeared in the definition of “prospectus” in the British Companies Act of 1929 suggests that the drafters of the American bill intended to expand its coverage. See post, at 599-600 (dissenting opinion). We consider it more likely that the omission reflected instead the judgment that the words “offering to the public” were redundant in light of the understood meaning of “prospectus.” Far from suggesting an intent to depart in a dramatic way from the balance struck in the British Companies Act, the legislative history suggests an intent to maintain it. In the context of justifying the “civil liabilities” provisions that hold “all those responsible for statements upon the face of which the public is solicited ... to standards like those imposed by law upon a fiduciary,” the House Report stated: “The demands of this bill call for the assumption of no impossible burden, nor do they involve any leap into the dark. Similar requirements have for years attended the business of issuing securities in other industrialized nations.” H. R. Rep. No. 85, at 5. So, too, the Report provided: “The committee is fortified in these sections [that is, §§11 and 12] by similar safeguards in the English Companies Act of 1929. What is deemed necessary for sound financing in conservative England ought not be unnecessary for the more feverish pace which American finance has developed.” Id., at 9. These passages confirm that the civil liability provisions of the 1933 Act, §§11 and 12, impose obligations on those engaged in “the business of issuing securities,” in conformance, not in contradiction to, the British example.
with whom Justice Blackmun, Justice O’Connor, and Justice Souter join, concurring.
As Justice Peterson of the Supreme Court of Oregon explained in his dissenting opinion, however, “[t]he findings of fact that the bicycle pathway system ‘could offset some of the traffic demand’ is a far cry from a finding that the bicycle pathway system will, or is likely to, offset some of the traffic demand.” 317 Ore., at 127, 854 P. 2d, at 447 (emphasis in original). No precise mathematical calculation is required, but the city must make some effort to quantify its findings in support of the dedication for the pedestrian/bicycle pathway beyond the conclusory statement that it could offset some of the traffic demand generated.
with whom Justice Blackmun and Justice Ginsburg join, dissenting.
The author of today’s opinion joined Justice Stewart’s dissent in Moore v. East Cleveland, 431 U. S. 494 (1977). There the dissenters found it sufficient, in response to my argument that the zoning ordinance was an arbitrary regulation of property rights, that “if the ordinance is a rational attempt to promote ‘the city’s interest in preserving the character of its neighborhoods,’ Young v. American Mini Theatres, [Inc.,] 427 U. S. 60, 71 (opinion of Stevens, J.), it is ... a permissible restriction on the use of private property under Euclid v. Ambler Realty Co., 272 U. S. 365, and Nectow v. Cambridge, 277 U. S. 183.” Id., at 540, n. 10. The dissent went on to state that my calling the city to task for failing to explain the need for enacting the ordinance “place[d] the burden on the wrong party.” Ibid, (emphasis added). Recently, two other Members of today’s majority severely criticized the holding in Moore. See United States v. Carlton, 512 U. S. 26, 40-42 (1994) (Scalia, J., concurring in judgment); see also id., at 39 (Scalia, J., concurring in judgment) (calling the doctrine of substantive due process “an oxymoron”).
Justice Kennedy, with whom The Chief Justice and Justice Thomas join, concurring in the judgment.
We therefore cannot agree with Justice Kennedy’s suggestion that the Rule can be read as expressing a policy that collateral statements — even ones that are not in any way against the declarant’s interest — are admissible, post, at 614. Nothing in the text of Rule 804(b)(3) or the general theory of the hearsay Rules suggests that admissibility should turn on whether a statement is collateral to a self-inculpatory statement. The fact that a statement is self-inculpatory does make it more reliable; but the fact that a statement is collateral to a self-inculpatory statement says nothing at all about the collateral statement’s reliability. We see no reason why collateral statements, even ones that are neutral as to interest, post, at 617-619 (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment), should be treated any differently from other hearsay statements that are generally excluded.
Without deciding exactly how much weight to give the Notes in this particular situation, compare Schiavone v. Fortune, 477 U. S. 21, 31 (1986) (Notes are to be given some weight), with Green v. Bock Laundry Machine Co., 490 U. S. 504, 528 (1989) (Scalia, J., concurring in judgment) (Notes ought to be given no weight), we conclude that the policy expressed in the Rule’s text points clearly enough in one direction that it outweighs whatever force the Notes may have. And though Justice Kennedy believes that the text can fairly be read as expressing a policy of admitting collateral statements, post, at 614, for the reasons given above we disagree.
We have stated that habeas review is available to check violations of federal laws when the error qualifies as “a fundamental defect which inherently results in a complete miscarriage of justice [or] an omission inconsistent with the rudimentary demands of fair procedure.” Hill v. United States, 368 U. S. 424, 428 (1962); accord, United States v. Timmreck, 441 U. S. 780, 783 (1979); Davis v. United States, 417 U. S. 333, 346 (1974). The IAD's purpose — providing a nationally uniform means of transferring prisoners between jurisdictions — can be effectuated only by nationally uniform interpretation. See 984 F. 2d, at 214 (Ripple, J., dissenting from denial of rehearing in banc). Therefore, the argument that the compact would be undermined if a State’s courts resisted steadfast enforcement, with total insulation from §2254 review, is not without force. Cf. Stone v. Powell, 428 U. S., at 526 (Brennan, J., dissenting) (institutional constraints preclude Supreme Court from overseeing adequately whether state courts have properly applied federal law). This case, however, gives us no cause to consider whether we would confront an omission of the kind contemplated in Hill, Timmreck, or Davis, if a state court, presented with a timely request to set a trial date within the IAD’s 120-day period, nonetheless refused to comply with Article IV(c).
with whom Justice Thomas joins, concurring in part and concurring in the judgment.
This Court has long applied equitable limitations to narrow the broad sweep of federal habeas jurisdiction. See Withrow v. Williams, 507 U. S. 680, 715-721 (1993) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part). One class of those limitations consists of substantive restrictions upon the type of claim that will be entertained. Hill, for example, holds that the claim of a federal statutory violation will not be reviewed unless it alleges “a fundamental defect which inherently results in a complete miscarriage of justice [o]r an omission inconsistent with the rudimentary demands of fair procedure.” 368 U. S., at 428. Most statutory violations, at least when they do not occur “in the context of other aggravating circumstances,” are simply not important enough to invoke the extraordinary habeas jurisdiction. Id., at 429. See also United States v. Timmreck, 441 U. S. 780, 783-785 (1979).
with whom Justice Stevens, Justice Kennedy, and Justice Souter join, dissenting.
Justice Scalia proposes to foreclose §2254 review of federal nonconstitutional claims where the state prisoner was afforded a full and fair opportunity to litigate those claims in state court. This proposal fails for obvious reasons. To hold that full and fair litigation in state courts is a substitute for a federal forum would be, to borrow a phrase, to “suc[k] the life out of [§2254].” See ante, at 357 (concurring opinion). At the heart of §2254 is federal court review of state court decisions on federal law. With one notable exception, see Stone v. Powell, 428 U. S. 465, 486-496 (1976), this Court uniformly has rejected a “full and fair opportunity to litigate” as a bar to § 2254 review. See Withrow v. Williams, supra; Kimmelman v. Morrison, 477 U. S. 365 (1986); Rose v. Mitchell, 443 U. S. 545 (1979); Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U. S. 307 (1979); see also Wright v. West, 505 U. S. 277, 299 (1992) (O’Connor, J., concurring in judgment) (disputing that a “full and fair hearing in the state courts” required deferential review in habeas).
with whom Justice Blackmun, Justice Stevens, and Justice O’Connor join, concurring in the judgment.
The opinions in both Haslip and TXO strongly emphasized the importance of the procedural component of the Due Process Clause. In Haslip, the Court held that the common-law method of assessing punitive damages did not violate procedural due process. In so holding, the Court stressed the availability of both “meaningful and adequate review by the trial court” and subsequent appellate review. 499 U. S., at 20. Similarly, in TXO, the plurality opinion found that the fact that the “award was reviewed and upheld by the trial judge” and unanimously affirmed on appeal gave rise “to a strong presumption of validity.” 509 U. S., at 457. Concurring in the judgment, Justice Scalia (joined by Justice Thomas) considered it sufficient that traditional common-law procedures were followed. In particular, he noted that “ ‘procedural due process’ requires judicial review of punitive damages awards for reasonableness.” Id., at 471.
In support of his argument that there is a historic basis for making the jury the final arbiter of the amount of punitive damages, respondent calls our attention to early civil and criminal cases in which the jury was allowed to judge the law as well as the facts. See Johnson v. Louisiana, 406 U. S. 356, 374, n. 11 (1972) (Powell, J., concurring). As we have already explained, in civil cases, the jury’s discretion to determine the amount of damages was constrained by judicial review. The criminal cases do establish — as does our practice today — that a jury’s arbitrary decision to acquit a defendant charged with a crime is completely unreviewable. There is, however, a vast difference between arbitrary grants of freedom and arbitrary deprivations of liberty or property. The Due Process Clause has nothing to say about the former, but its whole purpose is to prevent the latter. A decision to punish a tortfeasor by means of an exaction of exemplary damages is an exercise of state power that must comply with the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. The common-law practice, the procedures applied by every other State, the strong presumption favoring judicial review that we have applied in other areas of the law, and elementary considerations of justice all support the conclusion that such a decision should not be committed to the unreviewable discretion of a jury.
with whom The Chief Justice joins, dissenting.
And in TXO, a majority agreed that a punitive damage award may be so grossly excessive as to violate the Due Process Clause. 509 U. S., at 453-454, 458 (plurality opinion); id., at 466-467 (Kennedy, J., concurring in part and concurring in judgment); id., at 479-480 (O’Connor, J., dissenting). In the plurality’s view, however, “a judgment that is a product” of “fair procedures ... is entitled to a strong presumption of validity”; this presumption, “persuasive reasons” indicated, “should be irrebuttable,... or virtually so.” Id., at 457, citing Haslip, 499 U. S., at 24-40 (Scalia, J., concurring in judgment), and id., at 40-42 (Kennedy, J., concurring in judgment). The opinion stating the plurality position recalled Haslip’s, touchstone: A “‘concern [for] reasonableness’ ” is what due process essentially requires. 509 U. S., at 458, quoting Haslip, 499 U. S., at 18. Writing for the plurality, Justice Stevens explained:
We must concede that in Brecht v. Abrahamson this Court, in the course of holding that the more lenient Kot-teakos harmless-error standard, rather than the stricter Chapman standard, normally governs cases of habeas review of constitutional trial errors, stated that habeas petitioners “are not entitled to habeas relief based on trial error unless they can establish that it resulted in ‘actual prejudice.’” Brecht, 507 U. S., at 637 (emphasis added). This language, however, is not determinative. The issue in Brecht involved a choice of substantive harmless-error standards: the stricter Chapman, or the less strict Kotteakos, measure of harmlessness. Both of those cases had resolved the issue now before us the same way, placing the risk of doubt on the State. Moreover, the sentence from Brecht quoted above appears in a paragraph that adopts the very Kotteakos standard that we now apply. That paragraph does not explain why the Court would make an exception to the “grave doubt” portion of the Kotteakos standard. Furthermore, the Brecht opinion, in this respect, did not speak for a Court majority. Four Members of the Court, supporting application of Chapman’s standard, dissented. And Justice Stevens, while a Member of the majority, stated explicitly that the Kotteakos standard applied in its entirety. 507 U. S., at 640 (concurring opinion) (agreeing, in part, because that standard “places the burden on prosecutors to explain why those errors were harmless”).
with whom Justice Blackmun and Justice Stevens join, dissenting.
It is clear that Foremost overextended Executive Jet, which had reserved the significant relationship inquiry for aviation torts. As Justice Scalia noted in Sisson, Executive Jet is better “understood as resting on the quite simple ground that the tort did not involve a vessel, which had traditionally been thought required by the leading scholars in the field.” 497 U. S., at 369-370 (opinion concurring in judgment). Executive Jet did not in the least seek to alter the strict locality test for torts involving waterborne vessels. Foremost, however, converted Executive Jet’s exception into the rule. In addition to examining situs, Foremost required federal courts to ask whether the tort bore a significant relationship to maritime commerce, and whether the accident had a potential disruptive impact on maritime commerce. 457 U. S., at 673-675. The lower courts adopted different approaches as they sought to apply Foremost's alteration of the Executive Jet test. See Sisson, 497 U. S., at 365, n. 4 (citing cases).
In place of Sisson I would follow the test described at the outset. When determining whether maritime jurisdiction exists under § 1333(1), a federal district court should ask if the tort occurred on a vessel on the navigable waters. This approach won the approval of two Justices in Sisson, see 497 U. S., at 373 (Scalia, J., joined by White, J., concurring in judgment). Although Justice Scalia’s Sisson concurrence retained a “normal maritime activities” component, it recognized that anything a vessel does in the navigable waters would meet that requirement, and that “[i]t would be more straightforward to jettison the 'traditional maritime activity’ analysis entirely.” Id., at 374. I wholly agree and have chosen the straightforward approach, which, for all of its simplicity, would have produced the same results the Court arrived at in Executive Jet, Foremost, Sisson, and this action. Although this approach “might leave within admiralty jurisdiction a few unusual actions,” 497 U. S., at 374, such freakish cases will occur rarely. In any event, the resources needed to resolve them “will be saved many times over by a clear jurisdictional rule that makes it unnecessary to decide” what is a traditional maritime activity and what poses a threat to maritime commerce. Id., at 374-375.
We firmly established the importance of the equitable inquiry required by the ends of justice in “a trio of 1986 decisions” handed down on the same day. Sawyer, 505 U. S., at 339 (referring to Kuhlmann v. Wilson, 477 U. S. 436, Murray v. Carrier, 477 U. S. 478, and Smith v. Murray, 477 U. S. 527). In Kuhlmann, seven Members of this Court squarely rejected the argument that in light of the 1966 amendments, “federal courts no longer must consider the ‘ends of justice’ before dismissing a successive petition.” 477 U. S., at 451 (plurality opinion); id., at 468-471 (Brennan, J., dissenting); id., at 476-477 (Stevens, J., dissenting); see also Sawyer, 505 U. S., at 339 (noting that in Kuhlmann, “[w]e held that despite the removal of [the reference to the ends of justice] from 28 U. S. C. § 2244(b) in 1966, the miscarriage of justice exception would allow successive claims to be heard”). Thus, while recognizing that successive petitions are generally precluded from review, Justice Powell’s plurality opinion expressly noted that there are “limited circumstances under which the interests of the prisoner in relitigating constitutional claims held meritless on a prior petition may outweigh the countervailing interests served by according finality to the prior judgment.” 477 U. S., at 452. Similarly, writing for the Court in Carrier, Justice O’Connor observed that the Court had adopted the cause and prejudice standard in part because of its confidence that that standard would provide adequate protection to “ ‘victims of a fundamental miscarriage of justice,’ ” 477 U. S., at 495-496, quoting Engle v. Isaac, 456 U. S. 107, 135 (1982); however, Justice O’Connor also noted that the Court has candidly refused to “pretend that this will always be true,” Carrier, 477 U. S., at 496. For that reason, “‘[i]n appropriate cases,’ the principles of comity and finality that inform the concepts of cause and prejudice ‘must yield to the imperative of correcting a fundamentally unjust incarceration.’ ” Id., at 495, quoting Engle v. Isaac, 456 U. S., at 135; see also Smith v. Murray, 477 U. S., at 537. In subsequent cases, we have consistently reaffirmed the existence and importance of the exception for fundamental miscarriages of justice. See, e. g., Sawyer, 505 U. S., at 339-340; McCleskey, 499 U. S., at 494-495; Dugger v. Adams, 489 U. S. 401, 414 (1989) (Blackmun, J., dissenting).
Of greater importance, the individual interest in avoiding injustice is most compelling in the context of actual innocence. The quintessential miscarriage of justice is the execution of a person who is entirely innocent. Indeed, concern about the injustice that results from the conviction of an innocent person has long been at the core of our criminal justice system. That concern is reflected, for example, in the “fundamental value determination of our society that it is far worse to convict an innocent man than to let a guilty man go free.” In re Winship, 397 U. S. 358, 372 (1970) (Harlan, J., concurring). See also T. Starkie, Evidence 756 (1824) (“The maxim of the law is . . . that it is better that ninety-nine . . . offenders should escape, than that one innocent man should be condemned”). See generally Newman, Beyond “Reasonable Doubt,” 68 N. Y. U. L. Rev. 979, 980-981 (1993).
The overriding importance of this greater individual interest merits protection by imposing a somewhat less exacting standard of proof on a habeas petitioner alleging a fundamental miscarriage of justice than on one alleging that his sentence is too severe. As this Court has noted, “a standard of proof represents an attempt to instruct the factfinder concerning the degree of confidence our society thinks he should have in the correctness of factual conclusions for a particular type of adjudication.” In re Winship, 397 U. S., at 370 (Harlan, J., concurring); see also Addington v. Texas, 441 U. S. 418, 423 (1979). The standard of proof thus reflects “the relative importance attached to the ultimate decision.” Ibid. Though the Sawyer standard was fashioned to reflect the relative importance of a claim of an erroneous sentence, application of that standard to petitioners such as Schlup would give insufficient weight to the correspondingly greater injustice that is implicated by a claim of actual innocence. The paramount importance of avoiding the injustice of executing one who is actually innocent thus requires application of the Carrier standard.
By our references to Winship, of course, we do not suggest that Schlup comes before a habeas court in the same situation as one who has merely been accused of a crime. Having been convicted by a jury of a capital offense, Schlup no longer has the benefit of the presumption of innocence. Cf. Herrera v. Collins, 506 U. S., at 399 (O’Connor, J., concurring). To the contrary, Schlup comes before the habeas court with a strong — and in the vast majority of the cases conclusive — presumption of guilt. Our reference to Winship is intended merely to demonstrate that it is quite consistent with our jurisprudence to give content through a burden of proof to the understanding that fundamental injustice would result from the erroneous conviction and execution of an innocent person.
The claim that “the Court does not, and need not, decide whether the fundamental miscarriage of justice exception is a discretionary remedy,” ante, at 333 (O’Connor, J., concurring), is not in my view an accurate description of what the Court’s opinion says. Of course the concurrence’s merely making the claim causes it to be an accurate description of what the Court today holds, since the narrower ground taken by one of the Justices comprising a five-Justice majority becomes the law. Marks v. United States, 430 U. S. 188, 193 (1977).
Justice BREYER, with whom Justice O’CONNOR joins, dissenting.
[For concurring opinion of Justice O’Connor, see ante, p. 736; for opinions concurring in the judgments of Justice Stevens, see ante, p. 738, Justice Ginsburg, see ante, p. 789, and Justice Breyer, see ante, p. 789.]
We do not insist, as Justice Stevens suggests, ante, at 750 (opinion concurring in judgments), that “in all cases there will in fact be a significant difference between the intent of the physicians, the patients, or the families [in withdrawal-of-treatment and physician-assisted-suicide cases].” See supra, at 801-802 (“[A] physician who withdraws, or honors a patient’s refusal to begin, life-sustaining medical treatment purposefully intends, or may so intend, only to respect his patient’s wishes .... The same is true when a doctor provides aggressive palliative care;... the physician’s purpose and intent is, or may be, only to ease his patient’s pain” (emphasis added)). In the absence of omniscience, however, the State is entitled to act on the reasonableness of the distinction.
Justice Stevens observes that our holding today “does not foreclose the possibility that some applications of the New York statute may impose an intolerable intrusion on the patient’s freedom.” Ante, at 751-752 (opinion concurring in judgments). This is true, but, as we observe in Glucksberg, ante, at 735, n. 24, a particular plaintiff hoping to show that New York’s assisted-suieide ban was unconstitutional in his particular case would need to present different and considerably stronger arguments than those advanced by respondents here.
In Elrod v. Burns, 427 U. S. 347 (1976), we considered whether to apply the principles of the unconstitutional conditions cases to public employees dismissed on account of their political association. In keeping with local tradition, a newly elected county sheriff had discharged non-civil-service employees because they were not members of his political party. It was by no means self-evident whether our First Amendment precedents applied, for as Justice Powell explained in dissent, id., at 377-387, the patronage practices at issue had been sanctioned by history and had been thought by some to contribute to the effective operation of political parties. See also Branti v. Finkel, 445 U. S., at 522, n. 1, 527-532 (Powell, J., dissenting); Rutan v. Republican Party of Ill., 497 U. S. 62, 104-109 (1990) (Scalia, J., dissenting). If indeed those patronage practices fortify the party system, they may serve important First Amendment interests, since parties promote and generate political discourse, see, e. g., Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U. S. 1, 14-15 (1976) (per curiam); Democratic Party of United States v. Wisconsin ex rel. La Follette, 450 U. S. 107, 121-122 (1981).
We need not inquire, however, whether patronage promotes the party system or serves instead to entrench parties in power, see Elrod v. Burns, supra, at 364-373 (plurality opinion); Rutan v. Republican Party of III., supra, at 88-89, n. 4 (Stevens, J., concurring), for Elrod and Branti establish that patronage does not justify the coercion of a person’s political beliefs and associations. Although no opinion in Elrod commanded a majority of the Court, five Justices found common ground in the proposition that subjecting a nonconfidential, nonpolicymaking public employee to penalty for exercising rights of political association was tantamount to an unconstitutional condition under Perry v. Sindermann, supra. See Elrod v. Burns, supra, at 359 (plurality opinion) (“The threat of dismissal for failure to provide [support for the favored political party] unquestionably inhibits protected belief and association, and dismissal for failure to provide support only penalizes its exercise”); 427 U. S., at 375 (Stewart, J., concurring in judgment) (“The single substantive question involved in this case is whether a nonpolicymaking, nonconfidential government employee can be discharged or threatened with discharge from a job that he is satisfactorily performing upon the sole ground of his political beliefs. I agree with the plurality that he cannot”).
[For dissenting opinion of Justice Scalia, see ante, p. 686.]
It is axiomatic that one has standing to litigate his or her own due process rights. We need not explore the nature and extent of a defendant’s due process rights when he alleges discriminatory selection of grand jurors, and confine our holding to his standing to raise the issue. Our decision in Peters v. Kiff addressed the due process question, although a majority of Justices could not agree on a comprehensive statement of the rule or an appropriate remedy for any violation. See 407 U. S. 493, 504 (1972) (opinion of Marshall, J.) (“[Wjhatever his race, a criminal defendant has standing to challenge the system used to select his grand... jury, on the ground that it arbitrarily excludes ... members of any race, and thereby denies him due process of law”); id., at 507 (White, J., joined by Brennan and Powell, JJ., concurring in judgment) (“[Tjhe strong statutory policy of [18 U. S. C.] §243, which reflects the central concern of the Fourteenth Amendment” permits a white defendant to challenge discrimination in grand jury selection). Our more recent decision in Hobby v. United States proceeded on the implied assumption that a white defendant had standing to raise a due process objection to discriminatory appointment of a federal grand jmy foreperson and skipped ahead to the question whether a remedy was available. 468 U. S., at 350. It is unnecessary here to discuss the nature and full extent of due process protection in the context of grand jmy selection. That issue, to the extent it is still open based upon our earlier precedents, should be determined on the merits, assuming a court finds it necessary to reach the point in light of the concomitant equal protection claim. The relevant assumption of Hobby, and our holding here, is that a defendant has standing to litigate whether his conviction was procured by means or procedures which contravene due process.
Justice Ginsburg, concurring in the judgment.
We granted certiorari in this ease to resolve a conflict between the interpretation of EPCRA adopted by the Seventh Circuit and the interpretation previously adopted by the Sixth Circuit in Atlantic States Legal Foundation, Inc. v. United Musical Instruments, U. S. A., Inc., 61 F. 3d 473 (1995) — a ease relied on by the District Court, and acknowledged by the Seventh Circuit to be “factually indistinguishable,” 90 F. 3d, at 1241-1242. Petitioner, however, both in its petition for certiorari and in its briefs on the merits, has raised the issue of respondent’s standing to maintain the suit, and hence this Court’s jurisdiction to entertain it. Though there is some dispute on this point, see Part III, infra, this would normally be considered a threshold question that must be resolved in respondent’s favor before proceeding to the merits. Justice Stevens’ opinion concurring in the judgment, however, claims that the question whether § 11046(a) permits this cause of action is also “jurisdictional,” and so has equivalent claim to being resolved first. Whether that is so has significant implications for this case and for many others, and so the point warrants extended discussion.
We observe, at the outset, that Simmons is an unlikely candidate for “old-rule” status. As noted above, there was no opinion for the Court. Rather, Justice Blaekmun’s plurality opinion, for four Members, concluded that the Due Process Clause required allowing the defendant to inform the jury — through argument or instruction — of his parole ineligibility in the face of a prosecution’s future dangerousness argument. 512 U. S., at 168-169. Two Members of the plurality, Justice Souter and Justice Stevens, would have further held that the Eighth Amendment mandated that the trial court instruct the jury on a capital defendant’s parole ineligibility even if future dangerousness was not at issue. Id., at 172-174 (Souter, J., concurring). Justice Qins-BURG, also a Member of the plurality, wrote a concurrence grounded in the Due Process Clause. Id., at 174-175. The Chief Justice and Justice Kennedy joined Justice O’Connor’s decisive opinion concurring in the judgment, as described above. Id., at 175-178. And, two Justices dissented, arguing that the result did not “fit” the Court’s precedents and that it was not, in any case, required by the Constitution. Id., at 180, 185 (opinion of Scalia, J., joined by Thomas, J.). The array of views expressed in Simmons itself suggests that the rule announced there was, in light of this Court’s precedent, "susceptible to debate among reasonable minds.” Butler, 494 U. S., at 415; cf. Sawyer v. Smith, 497 U. S. 227, 236-237 (1990) (citing, as evidence that Caldwell v. Mississippi, 472 U. S. 320 (1985), announced a new rule, the views of the three Caldwell dissenters). An assessment of the legal landscape existing at the time petitioner’s conviction and sentence became final bolsters this conclusion.
Even were these two cases the sum total of relevant precedent bearing on the rule of Simmons, petitioner’s argument that the result in Simmons followed ineluctably would not be compelling. Gardner produced seven opinions, none for a majority of the Court. Taking the view expressed in Justice White’s opinion concurring in the judgment as the rule of Gardner, see Marks, supra, at 193, the holding is a narrow one — that “[a] procedure for selecting people for the death penalty which permits consideration of . . . secret information relevant to the character and record of the individual offender” violates the Eighth Amendment’s requirement of “reliability in the determination that death is the appropriate punishment.” 430 U. S., at 364 (citation and internal quotation marks omitted; emphasis added). Petitioner points to no secret evidence given to the sentencer but not to him. And, the evidence that he sought to present to the jury was not historical evidence about his “character and record,” but evidence concerning the operation of the extant legal regime.
The general proposition that the States retained the prerogative to determine how much (if at all) juries would be informed about the postsentencing legal regime was given further credence in Caldwell v. Mississippi, supra. In that case, the prosecution and the judge had, the Court concluded, improperly left the jury with the impression that a death sentence was not final because it would be extensively reviewed. Justice Marshall authored the opinion for the Court except for one portion. In that portion, Justice Marshall — writing for a plurality — concluded that, Ramos notwithstanding, sentencing juries were not to be given information about postsentencing appellate proceedings. Justice O’Connor, who provided the fifth vote necessary to the judgment, did not join this portion of Justice Marshall’s opinion. She wrote separately, stating that, under Ramos, a State could choose whether or not to “instruc[t] the jurors on the sentencing procedure, including the existence and limited nature of appellate review,” so long as any information it chose to provide was accurate. 472 U. S., at 342 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment).
In light of Ramos and Caldwell, we think it plain that a reasonable jurist in 1988 would not have felt compelled to adopt the rule later set out in Simmons. As noted above, neither Gardner nor Skipper involved a prohibition on imparting information concerning what might happen, under then-extant law, after a sentence was imposed. Rather, the information at issue in each case was information pertaining to the defendant’s “character and record.” Although the principal opinions in Simmons found Skipper (which, in turn, relied on Gardner) persuasive, Justice O’Connor distinguished Skipper from the facts presented in Simmons on this very ground, see 512 U. S., at 176 (opinion concurring in judgment), suggesting that the rule announced in Simmons was not inevitable. See also id., at 183 (Scalia, J., dissenting).
That distinction — between information concerning state postsentencing law on the one hand and evidence specifically related to the defendant on the other — was also at the heart of Ramos and Caldwell. In Ramos, the majority concluded that California had reasonably chosen to provide some, limited, postsentence information to the capital sentencing jury — though it noted that many other States had elected just the opposite. The principal dissent in Ramos would have forbidden the provision of any information about post-sentence occurrences for the very reason that it did not constitute evidence concerning the defendant’s “character or the nature of his crime.” 463 U. S., at 1022 (opinion of Marshall, J.). In Caldwell, the plurality and Justice O’Connor contested whether the fact that “appellate review is available to a capital defendant sentenced to death” was “simply a factor that in itself is wholly irrelevant to the determination of the appropriate sentence” (as the plurality concluded, 472 U. S., at 336), or whether provision of that information was a constitutional “policy choice in favor of jury education” (as Justice O’Connor concluded, id., at 342 (opinion concurring in part and concurring in judgment)).
Petitioner contends that, even if it is new, the rule of Simmons falls within the second exception to Teague, which permits retroactive application of “ ‘watershed rules of criminal procedure’ implicating the fundamental fairness and accuracy of the criminal proceeding.” Graham, 506 U. S., at 478 (quoting Teague, 489 U. S., at 311). Petitioner describes the “practice condemned in Simmons'” as a “shocking one.” Brief for Petitioner 33. The rule forbidding it, we are told, is “on par” with Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U. S. 335 (1963)— which we have cited as an example of the sort of rule falling within Teague’s second exception, see Saffle, 494 U. S., at 495 — because “both cases rest upon this Court’s belief that certain procedural protections are essential to prevent a miscarriage of justice,” Brief for Petitioner 35 (citations omitted). We disagree. Unlike the sweeping rule of Gideon, which established an affirmative right to counsel in all felony cases, the narrow right of rebuttal that Simmons affords to defendants in a limited class of capital cases has hardly “ ‘ “altered] our understanding of the bedrock -procedural elements” ’ essential to the fairness of a proceeding.” Sawyer, 497 U. S., at 242 (quoting Teague, supra, at 311, quoting, in turn, Mackey v. United States, 401 U. S. 667, 693 (1971) (Harlan, J., concurring in judgments in part and dissenting in part) (emphasis in Teague)). Simmons possesses little of the “watershed” character envisioned by Teague’s second exception.
Our decision in Teague recognized two exceptions to the general rule of nonretroactivity. The relevant exception for our purposes establishes that “a new rule should be applied retroactively if it requires the observance of ‘those procedures that . . . are “implicit in the concept of ordered liberty.’”” Ibid. (quoting Mackey v. United States, 401 U. S. 667, 693 (1971) (Harlan, J., concurring in judgments in part and dissenting in part), in turn quoting Palko v. Connecticut, 302 U. S. 319, 325 (1937)). In the opinion that provided the basis for the limitations on collateral review adopted in Teague, Justice Harlan emphasized the importance of protecting “bedrock procedural elements” that are “essential to the substance of a full hearing.” Mackey, 401 U. S., at 693-694. We endorsed that view, with the caveat that this exception should be limited to those “procedures without which the likelihood of an accurate [determination of guilt or innocence] is seriously diminished.” Teague, 489 U. S., at 313.
Since Teague was decided, this Court has never found a rule so essential to the fairness of a proceeding that it would fall under this exception. In my view, the right in Simmons — the right to respond to an inaccurate or misleading argument — is surely a bedrock procedural element of a full and fair hearing. As Justice O’Connor recognized in her opinion in Simmons, this right to rebut the prosecutor’s arguments is a “hallmar[k] of due process,” 512 U. S., at 175 (opinion concurring in judgment). See also id., at 174 (Ginsburg, J., concurring) (“This case is most readily resolved under a core requirement of due process, the right to be heard”). When a defendant is denied the ability to respond to the state’s case against him, he is deprived of “his fundamental constitutional right to a fair opportunity to present a defense.” Crane v. Kentucky, 476 U. S. 683, 687 (1986).
In Gardner v. Florida, 430 U. S. 349 (1977), a plurality of the Court concluded that the defendant’s due process rights had been violated because his “death sentence was imposed, at least in part, on the basis of information which he had no opportunity to deny or explain.” Id., at 362. Nine years later, in Skipper v. South Carolina, 476 U. S. 1 (1986), all nine Justices cited Gardner, with approval, as establishing the “elemental due process requirement that a defendant not be sentenced to death ‘on the basis of information which he had no opportunity to deny or explain.’ Gardner v. Florida, 430 U. S. 349, 362 (1977).” 476 U. S., at 5, n. 1; see also id., at 10-11 (Powell, J., concurring in judgment) (“The Court correctly concludes that the exclusion of the proffered testimony violated due process .... [Petitioner's death sentence violates the rule in Gardner").
Today, however, the Court seeks to revise the import of this line of cases. The first misstep in the Court’s analysis is its treatment of Gardner. The majority makes much of the fact that the lead opinion was joined by only three Justices, and instead of accepting the plurality’s due process analysis as the rule of Gardner, the Court takes Justice White’s concurring opinion, which was grounded in the Eighth Amendment, as expressing the holding of the case. The Court’s reading of Gardner ignores the fact that Justice White himself squarely adopted the due process holding of Gardner in his opinion for the Court in Skipper. Although his opinion accepted Skipper’s argument that the exclusion of evidence of his good behavior in prison at the sentencing hearing violated the Eighth Amendment requirement that the jury be allowed to consider all relevant mitigating evidence, Justice White went out of his way to add a footnote endorsing the Gardner plurality’s statement of the law and emphasizing that this “elemental due process requirement” provided an even more basic justification for the Court’s holding. Moreover, in his opinion concurring in the judgment in Skipper, Justice Powell, joined by the Chief Justice and then-JusTiCE Rehnquist, rejected the mitigating evidence rationale, relying instead on “the rule in Gardner.” 476 U. S., at 10-11. Thus, in Skipper, all nine Justices then serving on the Court endorsed Gardner’s holding that due process was violated when a sentencing determination rested on information that a defendant was not permitted to explain or deny. See also Clemons v. Mississippi, 494 U. S. 738, 746 (1990) (citing Gardner for the proposition that “[c]apital sentencing proceedings must of course satisfy the dictates of the Due Process Clause”); Simmons, 512 U. S., at 180 (SCALIA, J., dissenting) (quoting Skipper and Gardner as “indicating] that petitioner’s due process rights would be violated if he was ‘sentenced to death “on the basis of information which he had no opportunity to deny or explain,”’” but concluding that the petitioner could not show that his sentence violated this principle).
The Court ignores the fact that Justice Brennan and Justice Marshall agreed with the plurality’s conclusion that sentencing a defendant based on information he was not permitted to deny or explain violated due process, but refused to join the judgment insofar as it permitted further proceedings that could lead to another death sentence. See Gardner v. Florida, 430 U. S. 349, 364-365 (1977) (opinion of Brennan, J.); id., at 365 (Marshall, J., dissenting).
with whom Justice Souter joins, dissenting.
Justice Stevens quotes from some of the cases we have cited to suggest that the common law allowed recovery from harm caused by any overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy. See post, at 510-511, n. 5 (dissenting opinion). However, his quotations omit pertinent language. When read in context, it is clear that these passages refer to harm, not from any overt act, but only from overt acts that are themselves tortious. Compare ibid, with Adler v. Fenton, 24 How. 407, 410 (1861) C‘[I]t must be shown that the defendants have done some wrong, that is, have violated some right of theirs .... [I]n these eases the act must be tortious”); Royster v. Baker, 365 S. W. 2d 496, 499 (Mo. 1963) (“Strictly speaking, there has been no distinct form of writ or action of conspiracy; but the action sounds in tort, and is of the nature of an action on the case upon the wrong done under the conspiracy alleged. The gist of the action is not the conspiracy, but the wrong done by acts in furtherance of the conspiracy” (citations and internal quotation marks omitted)); Lesperance v. North American Aviation, Inc., 217 Cal. App. 2d 336, 345, 31 Cal. Rptr. 873, 878 (1963) (“ Tt is well settled that a conspiracy cannot be made the subject of a civil action unless something is done which without the conspiracy would give a right of action’ ”); Earp v. Detroit, 16 Mich. App. 271, 275, 167 N. W. 2d 841, 845 (1969) (“There is no civil action for conspiracy alone. It must be coupled with the commission of acts which damaged the plaintiff. Recovery may be had from parties on the theory of concerted action as long as the elements of the separate and actionable tort are properly proved” (citation omitted)); Halberstam v. Welch, 705 F. 2d 472, 479 (CADC 1983) (stating that civil conspiracy requires “an overt tortious act in furtherance of the agreement that causes injury. ... Since liability for civil conspiracy depends on performance of some underlying tortious act, the conspiracy is not independently actionable; rather, it is a means for establishing vicarious liability for the underlying tort”).
Justice Ginsburg concedes that federal equity courts have traditionally rejected the type of provisional relief granted in this case. See post, at 338 (opinion concurring in part and dissenting in part). She invokes, however, “the grand aims of equity,” and asserts a general power to grant relief whenever legal remedies are not “practical and efficient,” unless there is a statute to the contrary. Post, at 342 (internal quotation marks omitted). This expansive view of equity must be rejected. Joseph Story’s famous treatise reflects what we consider the proper rule, both with regard to the general role of equity in our “government of laws, not of men,” and with regard to its application in the very case before us:
Justice Ginsburg, with whom Justice Stevens, Justice Souter, and Justice Breyer join, concurring in part and dissenting in part.
CHIEF Justice Rehnquist dissents and would reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals in part, for the reasons given by Judge Williams in his dissenting opinion in that court, 167 F. 3d 552, 597 (CADC 1999).